Almost everyone needs Watanabe, Hosokawa’s translator,
					in order to communicate. The generals decide to make him their secretary. He
					will help them draft letters and write up plans. Many of the hostages
					request Watanabe to interpret when they want to talk to one another.
					When Kato and Coss talk about their plans to procure sheet music
					and to practice together, Watanabe translates for them. 

Messner, the Red Cross representative, regularly visits
					the mansion. Instead of carrying on intense negotiations between
					the terrorists and the government, Messner acts as a gofer for Coss,
					fetching her dental floss, a muffler, throat lozenges, and other
					items. He is routinely searched before he enters, and during one
					of these searches, one of the young terrorists can’t resist tickling
					his ribs. 

We learn that General Benjamin was a schoolteacher until
					his brother was arrested and imprisoned for handing out flyers for
					a political protest. After that, Benjamin joined the terrorist group
					La Familia de Martin Suarez, named after a ten-year-old boy who
					was shot dead while handing out flyers for a political rally. General
					Benjamin has left behind his wife and children to conduct this takeover. 

Coss and Kato talk about getting sheet music so they can
					practice. Father Arguedas is thrilled to learn that he can get the
					music they need from a friend, Manuel, a music teacher with an extensive music
					library. The generals agree to allow Father Arguedas to make one
					phone call to Manuel. During the conversation, Manuel says he heard
					that Coss’s accompanist was murdered and his hands were cut off.
					For a moment, Father Arguedas thinks to defend the terrorists. Father
					Arguedas puts Roxanne Coss on the phone so that she can give Manuel
					the list of music she desires. Father Arguedas recognizes that this
					is a thrilling moment for him and for his friend. He imagines a
					time in the future when he and Manuel will sit around the kitchen
					table recalling the moment they were able to help the famous opera
					singer. When that time comes, Father Arguedas will “know that he
					had been the more fortunate of the two because it was he whom she
					had looked at when she spoke.”

 	As soon as Father Arguedas hangs up the phone, Simon
					Thibault grabs it, although he has not been given permission to
					do so. He calls his home and leaves a message on the answering machine
					telling his wife that he loves her.

Watanabe and Messner chat. As they talk, Watanabe notices Carmen
					looking at him. He also notices how beautiful she is. He and Messner
					approach Carmen and ask her if she speaks Spanish. She says that
					Quecha, a language spoken throughout South America, is her first
					language. She says she is trying to improve her Spanish. Carmen
					speaks softly and briefly, and after they leave her, Messner notes
					that it is not often “you meet a shy terrorist.”

A few hours later, Messner comes back with the sheet music. General
					Alfredo, feeling that discipline has become too lax, decides that
					Messner must be told to come back tomorrow. Coss says that if she
					is not allowed to have the music immediately, she will never sing again.
					Even the generals are in love with her voice, and they agree to let
					her have the music.

Coss decides to begin practicing the next day, but Kato
					sits down to play right away. Once again the house fills with music.
					The narrator says that this is the happiest time of Carmen’s life.
					The music and the beauty of the house are wonders she never dreamed
					of when she was a child. She prays that God will see the beauty
					of their present existence and let them stay. 

That night, Carmen finds the courage to approach Watanabe with
					a request. When everyone is asleep, she lies down next to Watanabe,
					prays to Saint Rose for the words she needs, and then wakes him
					and asks him to teach her to read and write Spanish. He says he
					will.

In this chapter, we see both the trouble people have communicating with
					one another, and the ingenious ways they manage to communicate without
					language. Coss and Kato communicate with each other through their
					music. Coss and Hosokawa express their affection without words.
					Simply by being together, they communicate the closeness they feel
					for each other. Coss gets across her energy and her reliance on
					Hosokawa. Hosokawa gets across his steadiness and his reassuring
					friendship. Patchett suggests that humans want to connect to one
					another so badly that they will find ways to do it even when they
					lack a common language. 

For many of the characters, this time in captivity will
					be the most precious of their lives. Father Arguedas, for example,
					feels luckier than his professor friend, and Carmen prays to God
					that the captivity will never end. 

 	Much of Chapter Five focuses on the power and the limitations of
					language. Watanabe is kept busy translating for the captives and the
					terrorists, who need him in order to communicate with one another.
					At the end of the chapter, Watanabe agrees to give Carmen reading
					and writing lessons.

