Spear 1
Jake Spear
Mr. Gabriel Alaniz
IT-200
25 October 2020
8-2 Project Three: Systems Thinking
Lost Pines Outfitters is a small business that includes an online shop as well as a  brick 
and mortar location that specializes in outdoor clothing for value-conscious customers. Bel ow 
are the key elements for this system.
Description
 Fulfillment Department: An associate from the Fulfillment Department assigns tracking
numbers and packages orders to be shipped.
 Online Portal: This is where a customer can shop and order from the comfort of their 
own home.
 Retail Store: This is where customers of LPO can go to shop in person.
 Warehouse: This is where LPO keeps its products and where the warehouse associate 
picks items from.
 Warehouse Associate: The warehouse associate reviews the customer order from the 
warehouse computer and then views where to find the product(s) using the inventory 
tracking system. The warehouse associate then picks the item(s) from the warehouse, 
updates the inventory system and then sends the order to the fulfillment department.


Spear 2
 Warehouse Computer: The warehouse computer is used to review orders made by 
customers through the LPO online portal and to update/modify the inventory tracking 
system.
The online ordering system that LPO uses is very straight forward and simplistic. The 
process begins when the consumer uses LPO s online portal to place an order. The order then 
makes its way to the warehouse computer where it is reviewed and processed by an employee. 
The employee then uses the inventory tracking system to locate the item in the ware house. The 
employee removes the item(s) from the shelves and follows up by updating the inventory 
tracking system to show that the customer s order has been picked. The warehouse employee 
then sends the customer s order to the fulfillment department where it is packaged and  assigned a
tracking number by a fulfillment employee. The employee then ships the order via USPS and 
then the fulfillment employee updates the status of shipment by changing the status from 
processing to shipped. The customer receives the package and when that happens, the employee 
updates shipment to delivered. When that is complete, the employee then sends a thank you c ard 
to the customer and asks if the customer can leave a review based on their experience. LPO  s 
retail system for customer purchases is also very simplistic and straightforward. The cu stomer 
enters Lost Pine Outfitter s brick and mortar location. The customer shops around and figures out
if they would like to purchase anything or not. If they do, the customer brings the item(s) to the 
register. The LPO cashier then asks if the customer is apart of LPO s rewards program (of cours e
they are!). The customer then gives the cashier their information regarding the rewards program 
and then the cashier relays the total price of the purchase to the customer. The customer pa ys 
with either cash or card and while the customer is paying, the LPO employee is folding the 
wonderful black and red flannel shirt the customer has bought and asks if the customer would 


Spear 3
like a bag. The customer then receives the receipt and walks towards the door as the LPO c an be 
heard saying  Have an awesome day!  in the increasing distance from the register. A feedbac k 
loop present in this system is when a customer receives a package and when a customer pla ces 
an order. Another feedback loop in this system is when the associate updates the tracking 
information when the package has been shipped. One more feedback loop current in the retail 
system is when the employee asks the customer how they would like to pay.
Recommendations
The first issue the CEO is experiencing is discrepancies between LPO s inventory 
database and the inventory tracking system at their retail store. My recommendation  regarding 
this issue would be to ensure all technology linked to the inventory to be regularly updated after 
sales. The sales team needs to ensure all products leaving the store are accounted for and a re 
swiftly logged in the inventory database. A lack of communication seems to be plaguing the 
business as well. Information needs to flow between the workers on the frontlines, the warehouse
and management on a more consistent and effective basis.
The second issue is regarding there only being a single computer for the warehouse. 
Delays and downtime are expected when only having a single, functioning computer. The first 
order of business is to get a second or even a third computer system for the warehouse so that 
downtime is a thing of the past. The lack of more computer systems could also attribute to the  
discrepancies the CEO is noticing. Employees may be unable to update or modify information in 
the inventory tracking system due to system downtime, therefore causing a discrepancy bet ween 
actual physical inventory and what the system says there is.
System Model


Spear 4
Conclusion
Systems Thinking is an effective way to visualize the steps taken in any given syst em. It 
allows you to see into the future to either see where things are going wrong or where something 
needs modification. It gives you the opportunity to see the cause and effect of any situation and 
shows you in real-time how a small change can make or break an entire system. System Thi nking
gives you the chance to envision a fix to a current system or to create something entirely new . It 
essentially lets you see where optimizations can be made and where your problem areas are if 
done correctly.


