BANA 2082
Chapter 1.5
Financial Analytics
Analytical applications in finance are numerous and widespread. F or the forecasting of financial 
performance, the risk assessment of investment portfolios and ventures,  and the development of 
financial instruments such as derivatives, predictive models are  used. Prescriptive models are used to 
build optimal investment portfolios, assign assets and create optimal s trategies for the budgeting of 
capital. Europcar, Europe's leading rental car company, for ins tance , uses forecasting, simulation and 
optimization models to anticipate demand, evaluate risk and optimize  its fleet use. These models are 
applied through a decision-making support structure used in nine  European countries and have resulted 
in higher fleet efficiency , reduced costs and improved profitabili ty. Simulation is most frequently used 
for risk management in the financial sector, such as the implementati on of simulation models by Hypo 
Real Estate International to effectively mitigate the risk of commerci al real estate.
Human Resource (HR) Analytics
The management of the human capital of an enterprise is a relativ ely new application field for analytics. 
The HR role is responsible for ensuring that the business 
(1)has the mix of skill sets needed to fulfill its needs, 
(2) attract and provide an atmosphere that attracts the highest-q uality talent, and 
(3)achieves the targets of organizational diversity. Google refere nces the HR to 
Analytics acts as 'people analytics.' To assess the attributes of great l eaders, to evaluate variables that 
contribute to success, and to evaluate potential new hires, Google has a nalyzed extensive data on its 


own workers. Google also utilizes predictive analytics to constantly u pdate its estimate of potential 
turnover and retention of employees.
Marketing Analytics
One of the fastest-growing fields for the application of analytics is ma rketing. A deeper understanding of 
customer behavior has led to an increased interest in marketing an alytics through the use of scanner 
data and data created by social media. As a consequence, in mark eting, descriptive , predictive, and 
prescriptive analytics are all extensively used. Via analytics, a  greater understanding of consumer 
behavior leads to better use of advertisement budgets, more efficient p ricing techniques, improved 
demand forecasting, improved product line management , and imp roved customer retention and loyalty.
Turner Broadcasting System Inc., for example , uses forecasting a nd optimization models for its 
advertising partners to create more focused audiences and to better  plan advertisements. The use of 
these models led to an 186 percent rise in Turner's year-over- year advertisement revenue and, at the 
same time, a dramatic rise in advertisers' revenues. Those marketer s who wanted to benchmark find a 
$118 million revenue rise. Automobile maker Chrysler teamed with J .D. in another case of high-impact 
marketing analytics. 
To develop a groundbreaking range of predictive models to help its au tomotive pricing decisions,
Power and Associates. These models allow Chrysler to better understan d the effects of the proposed 
pricing arrangements (a mix of the proposed retail price, inter est rate offers, and rebates proposed by 
the manufacturer) and, as a consequence, to enhance its pricing ch oices. An approximate annual savings
of $500 million has been produced by the models.
Health Care Analytics
Due to demand to both manage costs and provide more efficient services, t he use of analytics in health 
care is on the rise. Descriptive , predictive, and prescriptive ana lytics are used to optimize scheduling for 


patients , employees, and facilities; patient flow; buying; and m anagement of inventory. A report by 
McKinsey Global Institute (MGI) and McKinsey & Company reports t hat by properly using analytics, the 
health care system in the United States could save more than $300 bi llion per year; these savings are 
roughly the equivalent of countries like Finland, Singapore, a nd Ireland's entire gross domestic product.
For diagnosis and treatment, the use of prescriptive analytics is rel atively recent, but it may prove to be 
the most significant application of analytics in health care. In Georgia, for instance , a group of scientists 
used predictive models and optimization to develop personalized diabet es care. They developed a 
predictive model that uses fluid dynamics and data from patient monit oring to determine the 
relationship at the individual level between drug dosage and dru g impact. This alleviates the need to 
monitor drug concentration for more invasive procedures. They then used an optimization model that 
takes output from the predictive model to decide how, using less dose, a p erson achieves better glycemic
control. Using the models results in hospital cost savings of about 39 p ercent, which equates to about 
$40,880 per patient.
Supply Chain Analytics
Effective distribution of products is the core service of companies s uch as UPS and FedEx, and analytics 
have long been used to achieve quality. For logistics companies such as U PS and FedEx, the optimum 
sorting of goods, vehicle and personnel scheduling, and vehicle routing a re all essential to profitability.
Companies can take advantage of better management of inventory an d processing and more productive 
supply chains. The analytical methods used in this field cover the enti re analytics spectrum. For example,
Bernard Claus, Inc., the women 's apparel manufacturer, has effe ctively used descriptive analytics to 
offer a visual representation of the status of its supply chain to its mana gers. By leveraging the inherent 
volatility in product prices, ConAgra Foods uses predictive and presc riptive analytics to better plan power


usage. In less than three months, ConAgra realized a 100 percent re turn on its investment in analytics, an
unheard of outcome for a big investment in technology.
Analytics for Government and Nonprofits
Analytics have been used by government agencies and other non-pr ofits to drive out inefficiencies and 
improve the efficacy and transparency of programs. Indeed, most adva nced analytics have their origins 
in the U.S. and English military dating back to World War II. In an ything from elections to tax collection, 
the use of analytics in government is becoming widespread today. For e xample, in the development of a 
more efficient approach to tax collection, the New York State Departm ent of Taxation and Finance has 
partnered with IBM to use prescriptive analytics. The result was a r ise of $83 million over two years in 
payments from overdue payers. In order to detect trends that differ entiate problematic annual personal 
income tax filings, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service has used  data mining. In one application, the IRS 
combines its data on individual taxpayers with data on mortgage pa yments made by those taxpayers 
collected from banks. When taxpayers record an unrealistica lly high mortgage payment compared to 
their declared taxable income, they are flagged as potential ta xable income under-reporters. The filing is 
then scrutinized further and can cause an audit.
Similarly, to ensure their efficacy and transparency to their d onors and consumers, nonprofit 
organizations have used analytics. The official international human itarian agency of the U.S. is Catholic 
Relief Services (CRS). Group of Catholics. The CRS goal is to provi de relief through its health , education, 
and agricultural programs to the victims of both natural and man-ma de disasters and to aid people in 
need around the world. To assist in the distribution of its annual bu dget, CRS uses an objective 
spreadsheet model focused on the impact that its different relief ac tivities and services would have in 
different countries.
Sports Analytics


Since 2003, when the renowned author Michael Lewis published  Moneyball, the use of analytics in 
sports has gained significant popularity. The book by Lewis tells th e story of how the Oakland Athletics 
used a player assessment analytical method to build a winning team w ith a small budget. Particularly in 
professional sports, the use of analytics for player evaluation and on-fiel d strategy is now widespread. To
evaluate players for amateur drafts and to determine how much t o give players in contract negotiations, 
professional sports teams use analytics; In order to achieve competitive a dvantage, professional 
motorcycle racing teams use advanced optimization for gearbox design;  and teams use analytics to assist
with on-field decisions such as which pitchers to use in a Major Leagu e Baseball playoff series in different
games.
There is also a rapid growth in the use of analytics for off-the-field busi ness decisions. For any business, 
maintaining customer satisfaction is crucial, and fans are the c ustomers of sports teams. To design its 
luxury seating offerings at Progressive Field based on fan survey resul ts, the Cleveland Indians 
professional baseball team used a form of predictive modeling known as conjoint analysis. In order to 
reflect the relative appeal and future demand for each game,  franchises across many major sports 
dynamically change ticket prices during the season using prescri ptive analytics.
Web Analytics
The study of online behavior, including but not limited to visits to w ebsites and social networking sites 
such as Facebook and LinkedIn, is Web analytics. Obviously, web ana lytics has tremendous consequences
for the promotion and sale across the Internet of goods and services. To decid e the best way to 
customize websites, place advertisements, and use social networks for the promotion of goods and 
services, leading businesses apply descriptive and advanced analy tics to data collected in online 
experiments. Online experimentation involves exposing different  subgroups to various versions of a 
website and monitoring the findings. Experiments can be done wi thout causing the disruption of the 


company's overall business because of the vast pool of Internet users.  These tests are useful since they 
enable the organization to use trial-and - error in statistically d eciding what makes a difference in the 
traffic and sales of their website.


