BANA 2082
Chapter 3.2 Lecture notes
Overview of Data Visualization
Decades of psychological research and other fields demonstrate t hat the human mind can process visual 
representations such as diagrams much more easily than numerical rows c an perceive. These same 
experiments however also indicate that the capacity of the hu man mind to perceive visual images has 
some limits and that certain images convey more detail than others. T he aim of this chapter is to 
introduce some of the more common types of data visualization and show wh en each form is suitable.
Microsoft Excel is an all-encompassing platform for business visualization o f basic data. Computer tools 
like Excel allow the development of several common examples of dat a visualization for everyone. 
However, the default tables and charts for Excel, as mentione d in this chapter, can be updated to 
improve clarification. New software forms dedicated to data visualiz ation have recently emerged. In this 
chapter, we are concentrating our techniques on Excel, but also me ntioning some of these more 
sophisticated data visualization software packages.
Effective Design Techniques
The data-ink ratio, first defined by Edward R. Tufte in 2001 in hi s book Visual Display of Quantitative 
Information, was one of the helpful ideas for creating efficient table s and charts for visualizing data. The 
data-ink ratio calculates the share that the Tufte words "data- ink" have with the total amount of ink used
in a table or diagram. Data-ink is the ink used to express the imp ortance of the data to the public in a 
table or diagram. Non-data-ink is used to transmit data to the viewe r in a table or graph that serves no 
helpful function.


Tables
The first decision is whether a table or a diagram is more successful . In general, diagrams sometimes 
relay information to readers faster and easier, but in some situation s a table is better suited. Tables can 
be included:
1. The reader must refer to such numerical values.
2. Reader must make accurate comparisons and not just relative c omparisons between different 
values.
3. The shown values have various units or very different magnitudes
When the Gossamer Industries accounting department summariz es the annual details for completing 
the company's federal tax form, the precise numbers for revenues a nd expenditures are relevant, not 
just the relative values.
Crosstabulation
A useful type of table is a crosstabulation which provides a table sum mary for two variables for data 
descriptions. Consider the following framework focused on Zagat' s Restaurant Review data to explain it. 
Data on consistency, meal and the usual length of time to wait for a ta ble during peak hours was 
collected for a sample of 300 local restaurants in Los Angeles.


