BANA 2082
Chapter 1.6
Legal and Ethical Issues in the Use of Data and Analytics
Increased attention has been paid to ethical questions regarding dat a protection and the ethical use of 
data-based models with the advent of big data and the rapid grow th in the use of analytics and data 
science to enhance decision making. 
Since corporations constantly gather data about their clients, the y have a responsibility to protect the 
information and not abuse the information. Customers and customer s have a responsibility to consider 
the trade-offs between allowing the collection and use of their data  and the advantages they receive 
from allowing a business to collect and use that data. For instance, m any businesses have loyalty cards 
that collect customer purchasing data. Customers must consent to a llow the organization to collect and 
use data on transactions in exchange for the rewards of using a loyalt y card, usually discounted rates. An 
agreement between the client and the organization must be signe d, and the agreement must clarify 
what data will be obtained and how it will be used. For example, the agreement might state that the 
date , time, location, and card number will be obtained for all scanned transactions, but that the 
company agrees to use that information only internally to the compa ny and not to give or sell that 
information to outside companies or individuals. The entity then has an  ethical responsibility to uphold 
the contract and make every effort to ensure that the information is se cure from any sort of 
unauthorized access. Unauthorized data access is known as a violation  of data. For all businesses in the 
modern age, data breaches are a major concern. A research by IB M and the Ponemon Institute 
calculated that $3.86 million is the total cost of a data breach.


The laws on data privacy are intended to protect the data of indiv iduals from being used against their 
wishes. The General Data Protection Regulation ( GDPR), which we nt into force in the European Union in 
May 2018, is one of the strictest data privacy regulations. The law  specifies that the request for 
permission to use the data of a person must be easily understood and ava ilable, the intended use of the 
data must be stated, and consent must be easily withdrawn. The  law also provides that an person has 
the right to a copy of their records and the right to "be forgotten," th at is, the right to request the 
erasure of their data. Analytics practitioners, indeed, anybody w ho handles or preserves data, are 
responsible for knowing the laws associated with the collection, storage , and use of data from 
individuals.
Ethical problems resulting from the use of data and analytics are j ust as important as legal problems. It is
the duty of analytics practitioners to act ethically, including protecting data, being open about the data 
and how it was obtained, and what it does and does not contain. The meth ods used to interpret the data
and any assumptions that have to be made for the methods used need to b e clear to analysts. Lastly, 
analysts must provide their clients with clear conclusions and und erstandable recommendations.
It is obviously immoral to knowingly use data and analytics for immoral p urposes. Of course, using 
analytics to determine who to target for fraud, for instance, is  inherently unethical since the purpose 
itself is an unethical aim. It is also fundamentally immoral to delib erately use skewed data to achieve an 
objective. It is obviously immoral to deceive a customer by misrepresen ting outcomes.
For instance, consider the case of an airline running an adverti sement that "84% of Chicago business 
fliers prefer the airline over their competitors." Such a statem ent is true if the airline randomly surveyed 
business fliers with a Chicago destination among all airlines. Although,  if the airline surveyed only its own
passengers for convenience, the survey would be skewed, and the arg ument would be deceptive 
because it did not survey fliers on other airlines. Indeed, if any thing, the only inference one might 


legitimately draw from the skewed survey of their own customers w ill be that 84 percent of the 
customers of those airlines favored that airline and 16 percent of  their own customers actually preferred 
another airline!
Author Cathy O'Neil explores how algorithms and models can be uncon sciously biased in her book, 
Weapons of Math Destruction. For example , imagine an analyst wh o is developing a loan award credit 
risk model. The location of the applicant 's home can be a predictor tha t correlates with other factors , 
such as income and ethnicity. Wealth is perhaps a important factor in  deciding the volume of a loan, but 
it is not race. In the credit risk model, a model using home location m ay also lead to unintentional bias. It
is the duty of analysts to ensure that this form of model bias and data bias does not become part of the 
model.
Researcher and opinion writer Zeynep Tufecki explores so-called " unintended consequences" of 
analytics, and particularly of engines for machine learning and r ecommendation. Tufecki has pointed out 
that many websites that use recommendation engines also suggest more rad ical content to users based 
on their previous browsing history, in terms of political beliefs and con spiracy theories. Tufecki and 
others theorize that this is because the machine learning alg orithms used have found that more extreme
content improves the browsing time of users on the web, which is also maxi mized by the machine 
learning algorithm as the objective function. This can therefore be  the unintended consequence of using 
a machine learning algorithm that maximizes the browsing time of u sers on the web, although it is not 
the purpose of the algorithm to encourage more radical views and disse minate false information. 
Analysts and decision-makers must be informed of their models' possible  unintended consequences, and
once they are identified, they must determine how to respond to thes e consequences.
Ethical standards for analysts are issued by many organisations, incl uding the American Statistical 
Association (ASA) and the Center for Operations Research and Manage ment Sciences (INFORMS). "The 


ASA uses the term statistician in its" Ethical Guidelines for Stati stical Practice, "but notes that this" 
includes all statistics and quantitative science practitioners, i rrespective of job title or area of degree, 
comprising statisticians at all levels of the profession and members of oth er professions who use and 
report statistical analyses and their applications.
INFORMS is a specialist association focused on research in operations and m anagement sciences, 
including analytics. INFORMS provides a credential for analytics c alled CAP , a certified analytics 
professional. To comply with the code of ethics / conduct provided by IN FORMS, all candidates for CAP 
are required. The INFORMS CAP guidelines state, "In genera l, analytics practitioners are expected to 
carry out their professional activities professionally, with special a ttention to the principles of quality, 
respect for citizens, autonomy of all, dignity, fairness, usefulness and competence." INFORMS also 
provides its members with a set of Ethics Guidelines covering ethic al behavior for professional analytics.
INFORMS Ethics Guidelines
Experts in analytics should strive to be: 
i. Accountable for their professional decisions and their work's effe cts. 
ii. Their assumptions, goals, supporters, intentions, shortcomings, and  possible conflicts of interest 
are further explored. 
iii. Honest in disclosing their results, even when they fail to achi eve the desired result. 
iv. Objective, regardless of their views or opinions, in their analy ses of evidence. 
v. Respectful of the views of others and their beliefs. 
vi. Responsible for conducting studies and initiatives that, by im proving our scientific knowledge, 
leading to organizational improvements and fostering social goods, h ave positive benefits.


