BANA 2082
Chapter 1.2
Business Analytics Defined
What makes it complicated and hard to make decisions? Uncertainty i s the number one 
challenge, possibly. We could do a much better job of planning and scheduling production if we knew 
how much the demand would be for our product. If we knew precisely how  long it takes for each phase 
in a project to be completed, we could better estimate the cost an d completion date of the project. If we
knew how stocks would do, it would be a lot easier to invest. 
Another aspect that makes it difficult to make choices is that w e face such a large number of 
options that we can not consider all of them. To help me reach my finan cial goals, what is the best mix of
stocks? For a company trying to increase its market share, what is the  right product line? In order to 
optimize sales, how does an airline market its tickets? 
The simpler term, analytics, is used by certain companies and indu stries. Analytics is also 
considered a wider term than market analytics, which often inv olves the use of analytical approaches in 
science and engineering. We use company analytics and analytics i n this text synonymously. 
Business analytics is the analytical method of converting knowledge int o insight for better 
decision-making. Business analytics is used for decision-making based on e vidence or facts, and is also 
seen as more objective than other decision-making alternatives. As we  can see, business analytics tools 
will improve decision-making by producing data insights, enhan cing our ability to forecast for planning 
more accurately, helping us measure risk, and offering better alte rnatives through analysis and 
optimization. A study conducted by researchers at MIT's Sloan School  of Management and the University


of Pennsylvania based on a broad sample of companies concluded tha t companies led by data-driven 
decision-making have higher productivity and market value and  improved production and profitability.
Chapter 1.3
A Categorization of Analytical Methods and Models
From basic reports to the most sophisticated optimization techniques (meth ods for finding the 
best course of action), business analytics can include everything.  Three broad types of techniques are 
commonly thought to consist of analytics: descriptive analytics, pred ictive analytics, and prescriptive 
analytics.
Descriptive Analytics
The collection of techniques explaining what has occurred in the p ast includes descriptive 
analytics. Examples are data requests, reports, descriptive stati stics, visualization of information 
including data dashboards, several techniques for data mining, an d simple models of what-if 
spreadsheets.
A data query is a request from a database for information with certai n characteristics. For 
instance, during the month of March, a query to the database of a  manufacturing plant could be for all 
records of shipments to a specific distribution center. This ques tion offers descriptive information on 
these shipments: the number of shipments, the amount of each shipm ent included, the date each 
shipment was sent, etc. The use of descriptive statistics (means, me asures of variance, etc.) and data 
visualization tools (tables, charts , and maps) could convey a report summa rizing relevant historical 
information for management. To find patterns or relationships in a large  database, simple descriptive 
statistics and data-visualization techniques can be used.


Data dashboards are tables, charts , maps, and summary statistic s sets that are updated as new 
data becomes available. Dashboards are used to help management mon itor various aspects of the 
performance of the company related to their decision-making duti es. Daily data dashboards could 
summarize sales by region, current inventory levels, and other  company-wide metrics for corporate-level
managers; front-line managers could view dashboards containing  metrics related to staffing levels, local 
inventory levels, and short-term sales forecasts.
Data mining is the use of computational approaches that occur in massiv e data sets to better 
understand patterns and relationships. For instance, data-mini ng techniques (including cluster analysis 
and sentiment analysis) are used by businesses to better understand t heir clients by analyzing text on 
social network sites such as Twitter. A business like Apple can better understand how its clients feel 
about a product like the Apple Watch by categorizing those terms as p ositive or negative and keeping 
track of how much certain terms appear in tweets.
Predictive Analytics
Predictive analytics are techniques that use models developed from  previous data to forecast 
the future or to assess the influence of one variable on another. For e xample, to create a mathematical 
model to forecast future sales, past data on product sales may be  used. Based on past trends, this mode 
will factor in the growth path and seasonality of the product. T o assist in estimating the lift in unit sales 
due to coupons or sales events, a packaged-food producer can use point-of -  sale scanner data from 
retail outlets. In order to help forecast the market share of a n ew product, survey data and previous 
buying history can be used. All of these are predictive ana lytics applications. 


Linear regression, analysis of time series, some data-mining approach es, and simulation, also referred to 
as risk analysis, all fall under the predictive analytics banner.  Later in this text, we address all of these 
approaches in greater detail.
In predictive analytics , data mining, previously mentioned as a descri ptive analytics tool, is also 
often used. A large grocery store chain, for example, may be intere sted in creating a targeted marketing 
campaign that provides potato chips with a discount coupon. The s tore may be able to use data mining 
by analyzing historical point-of - sale data to predict the cust omers are more likely to react to a deal on 
discounted chips by buying higher-margin products such as beer or soft drinks in addition to the chips, 
thereby raising the overall revenue of the store. 
In order to research the effect of uncertainty on a decision, simulati on includes the use of 
probability and statistics to construct a computer model. In order t o stress-test financial models, for 
instance, banks also use simulation to model investment and default ri sk. In the pharmaceutical industry,
modeling is most sometimes used to determine the possibility of a new dr ug being launched.
Prescriptive Analytics
Prescriptive analytics vary from descriptive and predictive ana lytics in that a course of action to 
be taken is suggested by prescriptive analytics; that is, a decision i s the product of a prescriptive model. 
A forecast or prediction is given by predictive models, but does not inc lude a judgment. A forecast or 
estimate, however, becomes a prescriptive model when paired wit h a law. We will, for instance, develop 
a model to predict the likelihood that an individual will defaul t on a loan. If we create a rule that says 
that if the approximate likelihood of default is more than 0.6, we  do not grant a loan, prescriptive 
analytics is now the predictive model, combined with the rule. Oft en referred to as rule-based models 
are those types of prescriptive models that rely on a rule or set of ru les.


Portfolio models in banking, supply network architecture models in ope rations, and price-
markdown models in retail are other examples of prescriptive anal ytics. In order to determine which mix 
of investments will produce the highest expected return whil e controlling or limiting risk exposure, 
portfolio models use historical investment return data. Supply -network design models provide locations 
for plants and distribution centers that will minimize costs while s till meeting requirements for customer 
service. Given historical evidence, when items have not sold as exp ected, retail price markdown models 
yield revenue-maximizing discount levels and the timing of discou nt offers. All of these models are 
known as models of optimization, that is, models that are subject to the cons traints of the situation to 
offer the best decision.


