BANA 2082
Chapter 2.2
Types of Data
In order to ensure that Dow companies make up a representative sample, c ompanies are added and 
removed from the Dow regularly. The companies in Dow today may ha ve changed from what appears in 
Table 2.1. 
Data can be classified in many ways depending on the set and form. In cer tain instances, data from the 
population with all elements with interest can not be obtained. In su ch cases, we obtain data from a 
population subset known as a sample. For example, with the thousands of publicly traded firms in the 
United States, it would be too time consuming and costly to track and  evaluate all these stocks every day.
The Dow represents a sample of 30 stocks of major public companies base d in the United States, and the
broader population of all publicly listed companies is also viewed as b eing. It is very important to collect 
sample data that reflect population data in order to generalize t hem. In most cases (although not for the 
Dow), a representative sample may be obtained from population data  by random sample. The treatment
of populations and samples will introduce subtle variations in how th e summary statistics are measured 
and interpreted. We can work with sample data in nearly all  realistic applications of business analytics.
Quantitative and Categorical Data
Data shall be called quantitative data if numerical and ari thmetical operations may be performed on 
them, such as addition , subtraction , multiplication and division. For ex ample, in table 2.1, we can add 
up the values for Dow data volume to determine the total volume of  all shares exchanged by the Dow 
companies. If arithmetic operations on the data can not be performe d, categorical data are considered. 
Categorical data can be summarized by counting the number of obser vations or by calculating the 


proportions of observations in either group. For example , the data in T able 2.1 in the Industry column is 
categorical. The number of Dow companies in the telecommunicati ons industry can be counted. Table 
2.1 introduces three financial industry companies: America n Express, Goldman Sachs and Visa. 
Arithmetic operations on the Industry column data can not be done.
Cross-Sectional and Time Series Data
It is important to differentiate between cross-sectional data and time se ries data for statistical analysis. 
Cross-sectional data was obtained at or about the same time by multiple enti ties. Table 2.1 data are 
cross-sectional because at the same time (June 2019), they identify t he 30 companies that form Dow. 
Data from time series was accumulated over a variety of periods. Data  from time series are also used in 
corporate and economic publications. Those graphs allow analysts to unde rstand what occurred in the 
past, to identify patterns over time and to predict potential time se ries levels. The time series diagram in 
Figure 2.1, for example, shows the value of the DJI from January 2 006 to May 2019. The figure shows 
that the DJI in 2007 crossed over 14,000. The financial crisis in 2 008, however, led to a big decrease in 
the DJI to between 6,000 and 7,000 by 2009. Since 2009, the DJ I has risen by 26,000 generally in 2019.
Sources of Data
Data necessary to analyze a business problem or opportunity can often be obt ained with an appropriate 
study; such statistical studies can be classified as either experi mental or observational. In an 
experimental study, a variable of interest is first identifie d. Then one or more other variables are 
identified and controlled or manipulated to obtain data about how th ese variables influence the variable 
of interest. For example, if a pharmaceutical firm conducts an ex periment to learn about how a new drug
affects blood pressure, then blood pressure is the variable of inter est. The dosage level of the new drug 
is another variable that is hoped to have a causal effect on blood pressu re. To obtain data about the 
effect of the new drug, researchers select a sample of individual s. The dosage level of the new drug is 


controlled by giving different dosages to the different groups of ind ividuals. Before and after the study, 
data on blood pressure are collected for each group. Statistical analy sis of these experimental data can 
help determine how the new drug affects blood pressure.
Nonexperimental, or observational, studies make no attempt to control th e variables of interest. A 
survey is perhaps the most common type of observational study. For inst ance, in a personal interview 
survey, research questions are first identified. Then a questionnair e is designed and administered to a 
sample of individuals. Some restaurants use observational studies to ob tain data about customer 
opinions with regard to the quality of food, quality of service, atmosph ere, and so on. A customer 
opinion questionnaire used by Chops City Grill in Naples, Florida, is show n in Figure 2.2. Note that the 
customers who fill out the questionnaire are asked to provide rating s for 12 variables, including overall 
experience, the greeting by hostess, the table visit by the manage r, overall service, and so on. The 
response categories of excellent, good, average, fair, and poor pro vide categorical data that enable 
Chops City Grill management to maintain high standards for the res taurant s food and service.
In certain instances, data for a specific application may be derive d from a previously performed 
experimental or observational research. For example , businesses main tain a number of databases 
concerning their staff , clients and businesses. Data on wages, age s and years of experience of workers 
can typically be collected from internal personnel records. Othe r internal reports provide information on 
revenue, promotional expenses, shipping costs , inventory level s and quantities of output. Most 
businesses often hold accurate customer records. 
Anyone wanting to use data and statistical analysis for decision making  needs to be mindful of the time 
and expense to collect the data. If data are to be collected in a  relatively brief time, the use of existing 


data sources is desirable. If key data are not readily available  from a credible established source, 
consideration must be given to the extra time and expense involved in obt aining the data. In both 
situations, the decision-maker should consider the possible contrib ution to the decision making process 
of the statistical analysis. The cost of collecting data and subse quent analytical data should not go 
beyond the savings gained by making a better decision using the information.
Comments
Organizations specialized in data processing and maintenance mak e vast volumes of market and 
economic data accessible. Companies can use leasing agreements or  purchases to access these external 
data sources. Three companies that offer robust business database se rvices to customers include Dun & 
Bradstreet, Bloomberg and Dow Jones & Company. Nielsen and Ipsos are tw o companies that have 
successfully developed companies that collect and process data tha t they sell to marketers and 
manufacturers. Data from a range of industry groups and special i nterest organizations are also available.


