BSC 2085 LECTURE
STUDY GUIDE FOR ALL TEST INCLUDING FINAL TEST
Important Note:  This is not an all-inclusive study guide. The student must read  and understand the 
chapters in the test book plus study and see all the ancillarie s provided by the publisher in its web page 
in order to pass the test.
Study guide for Chapter 1. Objectives:
1. What is anatomy? Meaning  cutting open,  that denotes the study of the structure o f internal 
and external features of the body and how they relate to each ot her
2. What is pathological anatomy? A medical specialty that is c oncerned with the diagnosis of 
disease
3. What is systemic physiology? Study of function within an organ  system
4. Systemic anatomy? Study of structures of cardiovascular sys tem (organ systems)
What is physiology? Study of function of anatomical structures
5. What is Surface anatomy? Study of the external features of t he body
6. What is Regional Anatomy? Study of anatomy within a specific re gion of the body (Study of 
anatomical organization of specific areas of body such as neck or trun k)
7. What is Embryology? The branch of biology that studies the de velopment of sex cells fertilization
8. What is Cytology? Study of cells
9. What is Histology? Study of tissues - structure of muscle tissue
10. Levels of Organization of the matter? Chemicals, cells, tissues, organs, organ systems, organism
11. Systems. Organs of each system   includes all the organs of a system interacting to accomplish a    
common goal
12. Functions of every system
13.  Anatomical position. Describe it (Palms forward, feet togeth er, standing erect, arms and hands 
at sides, eyes straight ahead)
14. Supine position. Describe it (Lying on back)
15. Prone position. . Describe it (Lying face down)
16. Directional terms are used to describe one body part in relation to a nother. Describe: (cephalic 
or cranial/HEAD)- caudal, proximal-distal, (anterior/F RONT or ventral/BELLY)-(posterior or 
dorsal/BACK), medial-lateral, deep-superficial, right- lef
17.  Body cavities. Describe them. (Dorsal   Spinal cord & brain;  Thoracic   Heart & lungs; Abdominal
  Digestive organs, kidneys; Pelvic   Bladder & reproductive organ s)
18. Organs contained within: the thoracic cavity, the abdomin al cavity and the pelvic cavity.
19.  Name the serous membranes that covers the lungs. (PLEURA)
20. Name the serous membranes that covers the heart. (PERICARD IUM)  Visceral - Innermost
21. Name the serous membrane that covers the abdominal organs. (P ERITONEUM)
22.  Mediastinum.  What is the mediastinum? (A division of the thoraci c cavity that contains 
structures; separates 2 pleural cavities)  Where is it? (Thoracic cavity)  Organs contained within it.
 trachea.   
 esophagus.   
 great vessels. the arch of the aorta. thoracic portions of the lef com mon carotid and the lef   
subclavian arteries;
1


 Veins. the innominate veins and the upper half of the superior ven a cava; ...   
 thymus.   
 phrenic and vagus nerves and lef recurrent nerves.   
 thoracic duct.   
 some lymph glands.   
23.  Diaphragm. Cavities separated by the diaphragm. (Dome- shaped muscle that separates thoracic 
cavity from abdominal cavity)
24. Identify the regions of the human body, name them, example: cervical (Neck), brachial (Arm), 
antebrachial (Forearm), femoral (Thigh), gluteal (Buttocks) , sural (Calf), crural (Shin), pedal (Foot)
etc. 
25.  Abdominopelvic regions. Name them. 
26. Abdominal Quadrants. Name of each one. (RUQ, RLQ, LUQ, L LQ)
27.  Planes. Sagittal (divides into right & lef), Parasagittal (di vides into unequal right & lef), 
midsagittal/median (divides middle into right & lef), Transve rse (divides into superior & 
inferior), Frontal or coronal (divides into anterior & posterior)
28. Which plane separates the body into right and lef (sagittal) , superior and inferior (transverse), 
anterior and posterior (coronal).
29.  Positive feed back (Exaggerates stimulus) (Important in proc esses that must be completed 
quickly)
(A positive feedback system reinforces, strengthens, or exaggera tes a change from the normal range 
or balance. For example, the contractions of childbirth and blood cl otting achieve their end result by 
positive feedback mechanisms. These mechanisms do not happen very ofen .)
30.  Negative feed back mechanism. Examples. (Decreases stimulus)  (Homeostatic regulation of 
body temp) (Primary mechanism of homeostatic regulation)
2


(A negative feedback system reverses or counters the change from th e normal range or balance. For 
example, blood pressure and body temperature are maintained a t normal ranges by negative 
homeostatic mechanisms. These mechanisms are the most common.)
31. The integrating center that regulates body temperature i s the hypothalamus
32. Which system directs long term responses to change? Endocrine
33. Which system produces a more rapid response than the Nervous s ystem? (Nervous system more
rapid response than endocrine system)
34.  Homeostasis is the central principle of physiology. Explain wha t homeostasis is (Stable internal 
environment)
35.  Failure of Homeostatic regulations leads to (Illness/death)
36. Imagen techniques. 
37. What is Pericarditis? (Swelling of saclike membrane tha t surrounds heart)  What is Pleurisy? 
(Inflammation of the pleura)  What is Peritonitis? (Inflammation of the peritoneum)
38. What is Thoracentesis? (Used to remove fluid/air from pleura)  What is Ascites? (Fluid 
accumulation in the peritoneal cavity causing abdominal swel ling)  What is Mediastinitis 
(Inflammation of mediastinum   usually due to tear in esophagus or che st surgery)
BSC 2085 LECTURE
Chapter 2 Study Guide
Chapter 2
1. Atoms: (Smallest, stable units of matter)  Concept and characteristics, what determines their 
chemical behavior (Number/arrangement of electrons in the out er energy level)???
2H = 2 atoms of H
2. How many electrons are there in the innermost electron shell in a n atom? (   The first shell can   
hold up to   two electrons  , the second shell can hold up to eight (2 +      6  ) electrons, the third shell   
can hold up to 18 (2 + 6 + 10) and so on.
3. The atomic # of an atom is determined by: (# of Protons in nucleu s)
4. The smallest stable units of matter are: (Atoms)
5. What is atomic weight? (Mass of an atom)
6. What is a molecule? (When 2 or more atoms join together by strong bond s)
7. Sub atomics particles? How are they charged? (Proton +)(Electr on -)(Neutron   neutral)  
3


8. Ionic (Attraction between cations & anions) , covalent (2 atoms share electrons) , hydrogen bonds 
(Weak, holds bonds   between   water molecules   holds atoms in water molecules = polar   
covalent forms water molecules)
9. Are the covalent and the hydrogen strong or weak bonds?
10. States of matter. Characteristics (Solid   particles packed tigh tly, fixed position, definite shape & 
do not conform to shape of container; liquid   indefinite shape; gas    high kinetic energy, 
particles will spread out; plasma)
11. What is a synthesis reaction? DEHYDRATION  (A+B   AB) What is decomposition reaction? 
HYDRATION  (Chemical reaction that breaks a molecule into smaller fragment s by breaking its 
chemical bonds) (AB   A+B)
12. What is a dehydration reaction? (Synthesis)
13. What is Hydrolysis? What is condensation synthesis?
14. What is an exergonic reaction (   Chemical reactions that release energy)     What is an endergonic 
reaction (   Chemical reactions that absorb energy  )   
15. What is enzyme reaction? Characteristics of the Enzymes.
16. What is active site? (Where substrate binds to enzyme)  What is a substrate? (Molecule acted 
upon by enzyme)
17. What is activation energy? (   The minimum quantity of energy that the reacting species must   
possess in order to undergo a specified reaction)
18. Why the enzymes are catalysts? (Lower activation energy requir ed to start a chemical reaction)
19. What is saturation limit?
20. How the lack of a cofactor affects the enzyme s function?
21. What is metabolism?
22. What is a nutrient? Chemicals that must be in our diet in order for the body to function 
normally. We must consume them in the foods that we eat because gener ally they can t be 
made by our bodies.
23. What is a metabolite? ( Metabolites are chemicals involved in or byproducts of normal 
metabolism)
24. What is a hydrophilic molecule? (Molecules that interact re adily with water)  What is a 
hydrophobic molecule? (Molecules that are repelled by water)  (Fear water   fats, oils)
25. Examples of organic compounds. Organic compounds: classifications a nd functions of each of 
them (Organic molecules always have C & H - carbs, lipids, proteins, n ucleic acids)
Carbs   provide energy
Lipids   energy storage, source of energy, insulation, protection, st ructural materials for cell 
membrane, transport proteins, hormones, vitamins
Proteins - 
26. What is a protein? (Organic macromolecule composed of C, H, O & N , sometimes Sulfur)
27. Name the protein shapes
28. Name the examples of protein structures (4) ( Primary    sequence of amino acids that form the 
protein   lycine-leucine-glycine; Secondary    alpha helix or beta pleated sheets; Tertiary    
globular protein; Quarternary    several peptide chains forming functional protein   
Hemoglobin)
29. Function of the proteins? Support : structural proteins   Movement : contractile proteins   
Transport : carrier proteins   Buffering : regulation of pH   Metabolic regulation : enzymes   
Coordination and control : hormones   Defense : antibodies
30. What is denaturation? (Enzyme breaks down - can be due to ex tremely high temp)
31. What is an amino acid? Amino group, central Carbon, Carboxyl  group (Differ by R group)
32.  What is a Peptide bond? Give examples (Holds amino acids together  in a chain)
4


33. Name the structural lipids ( Triglycerides    protects & cushions structures such as eye & kidney, 
insulation, energy storage - also referred as fats, eicosanoids, steroi ds, phospholipids, and 
glycolipids; Steroids ; Eicosanoids : Prostaglandins & Leukotrienes)
34. What is the most important metabolic fuel in the body? (Carb)
35. What is the table sugar? (Sucrose C12H22O11)
36. What is glycogen? (Energy storage in animals)
37. Examples of inorganic compound (Molecules that are not base d primarily on a C-H structure; 
CO2, O2, H2O, Inorganic acids, bases & salts)
38. What is the table salt? NaCl-
39. What is a prostaglandin? (Modified fatty acids that coordina te & direct local cellular activities   
local hormones, released by cells to direct local cellular activit y)(Respond to hormones, blood 
clotting, inflammation, immunity, stomach acid secretion, airway d iameter, smooth muscle 
contraction, lipid breakdown)
40. Most of the fat found in the human body is in the form of TRIGYC ERIDES   components of fatty 
acids
41. Function of the buffers? (Weak acid + its salt acting as weak base ) (Help to maintain 
homeostasis; defense against large pH changes)  
Buffers stabilize the pH of a solution by removing or adding hydroge n ions.  Buffer systems  
function to convert strong acids or bases into weak acids or bases.
42. Ph, Values (1 = most acidic, 7 = neutral, 14 = most basic)
43. Acidosis (Excess acid in blood = lower than normal pH) Values (Blood p H 7.35 or lower)  Alkalosis 
(Excess base = higher than normal pH) Values (pH 7.45 or greater)
44. Name the nucleic acids (DNA, RNA)  (Purines   Adenine, Guanine; Pyrimidines   Cytosine, 
Thymine, Uracil)   process genetic info
45. Each nucleotide is composed of a pentose sugar, a nitrogenous base, a nd a phosphate group
BSC 2085 LECTURE
Chapter 3 Study guide
*What is the cytosol? (Fluid portion of cytosol inside cell; it is a mixture of water and various dissolved 
and insoluble materials, in which the organelles and inclusions are  suspended)
*Classification of the organelles
Membranous (isolated from cytosol by plasma membrane)
Nonmembranous (not completely enclosed by membranes & components are i n contact with 
cytosol) .
*Name the membranous organelles (nucleus, ER, Golgi, lysosomes, per oxisomes, mitochondria) .
*Name the nonmembranous organelles (cytoskeleton, microvilli, c entrioles, cilia, ribosomes, 
proteasomes) .
*Function of the membranous organelles 
(Nucleus    Control of metabolism; storage and processing of genetic informati on; control of 
protein synthesis) 
(ER - synthesis of secretory products; intracellular storage and tran sport; Rough ER  has 
ribosomes, and it modifies and packages newly synthesized proteins; Smooth ER  - synthesizes lipids and 
carbohydrates) 
(Golgi  - Storage, modification, and packaging of secretory products and lysoso mal enzymes) 
5


(Lysosomes  - Intracellular removal of damaged organelles or pathogens) 
(Peroxisomes  - Catabolism of fats and other organic compounds; neutralization of tox ic 
compounds generated in the process) 
(Mitochondria  - Produce 95% of the ATP required by the cell)
*Function of the nonmembranous organelles 
(Cytoskeleton  - Serves as the cell s skeleton. It is an internal protein framew ork that gives the 
cytosol strength and flexibility) 
(Microvilli  - Small, finger-shaped projections of the plasma - greatly increase  the surface area to 
facilitate absorption of extracellular materials) 
(Ribosomes    Protein synthesis) 
(Centrioles  - direct the movement of chromosomes during cell division; organiza tion of 
microtubules in cytoskeleton) 
(Cilia - move materials over cell surfaces; environmental sensor) 
(Proteasomes - Breakdown and recycling of damaged or abnormal intra cellular proteins)
(Flagella   propel sperm)
*Functions of the cell membrane (physical isolation, regulation of exc hange with the environment, 
sensitivity to the environment, and structural support)
*Name the other two names of the cell membrane (Plasma membrane, p hospholipid bilayer)
*Membrane lipids (A compound that belongs to group which forms the double-layered surface of all 
cells)( Phospholipids, glycolipids, and cholesterol)
Characteristics of the phospholipids bilayer (Hydrophilic heads, hydrophobic tails, cholesterol)
*Membrane proteins and variety of specialized functions 
Receptor protein   (in plasma membrane, are sensitive to presence of extracellular ions or 
molecules called ligands; ligand binds to receptor)
Carrier protein   (bind solutes and transport them across plasma memb rane)
Integral protein   (part of membrane itself)(channel protein s are integral proteins that allow 
water, ions & small water-soluble solutes through plasma membrane)
Peripheral protein   (are attached to, but can separate from , the membrane)
*Glycocalyx. Functions
*Nucleus function (Control of metabolism; storage and processing of geneti c information; control of 
protein synthesis) 
Content (The nucleus is a cellular organelle that contains DNA, RNA , enzymes, and proteins) 
*Nuclear envelope (The nuclear envelope is a double membrane tha t surrounds the nucleus; the 
perinuclear space is the region between this double membrane ) 
*Location of the DNA (Inside nucleus)
*Location of the chromosomes and # of chromosomes (23 pairs of chromosomes; loca ted inside 
nucleus). 
*What is chromatin (In nondividing cells, DNA is loosely coiled & orga nized called chromatin)
*What is the function of the nucleoli? (Synthesize ribosomal RNA; a ppear as dark-staining areas in 
nuclei)
*What is protein synthesis (The assembling of functional polypeptides i n the cytoplasm)
*What is transcription (Production of RNA from DNA template)
*What is translation (The assembling of functional polypeptides in the  cytoplasm)
*How is the movement of materials across the cell membrane? (A selectivel y permeable membrane 
allows the passage of some substances and restricts the passage of others. I t lies between two extremes:
impermeable, which allows no substances to pass, and freely permea ble, which permits the passage of 
any substance)
*What is diffusion? (The passive movement of a substance from an area of h igher concentration to an 
6


area of lower concentration. Diffusion proceeds until the concentra tion gradient is eliminated 
(equilibrium is reached) 
*What is osmosis? (the diffusion of water across a selectively permeable mem brane from one solution 
to another solution that contains a higher solute concentration)(less  conc to higher conc)
*What is a hypotonic solution? (Solution with lower solute or osmotic conc)(If RB C placed = swelling)
*What is a hypertonic solution? (Solution with higher solute or osmotic conc) (If RBC placed = crenation)
*What is an isotonic solution? (The 2 solutions have equal solute or osmotic conc)
*What is Crenation? (Shrinking of RBCs   cell shrivels & dehydrates)
*What is facilitated diffusion? (Substances such as glucose & amino acid s that are insoluble in lipids & 
too large to pass membrane can be passively transported across the membran e by carrier proteins in a 
process called facilitated diffusion   along conc gradient high t o low)
*What is active transport? (High-energy bond (in ATP or another hig h-energy compound) provides the 
energy needed to move ions or molecules across the membrane; does not d epend on conc gradient)
*What is vesicular transport? (The traffic of materials into or out  of the cell takes place in vesicles , small 
membranous sacs that form at, or fuse with, the plasma membrane)
*What is Exocytosis? (The ejection of cytoplasmic materials by the fusi on of a membranous vesicle with 
the plasma membrane)
*What is Endocytosis? (The movement of relatively large volumes of extr acellular material into the 
cytoplasm by the formation of a membranous vesicle at the cell surface )
*What is Pinocytosis? (The vesicle-mediated movement into the cyto plasm of extracellular fluid  and its 
contents)
*What is Phagocytosis? (The process by which certain white blood cells e ngulf bacteria)
*What is Mitosis? (The essential step in cell division in which a single  cell nucleus divides to produce two 
identical daughter cell nuclei)
*What is Meiosis? (Production of sex cells)
*What is Interphase? (A stage in a cell s life when it performs all  its normal functions and, if necessary, 
prepares for cell division. Most somatic cells spend the majority of t heir time in interphase, which 
includes the G1, S (DNA replication), and G2 phases)
*What is Prophase? (Chromatin condenses and chromosomes become visible; c entrioles migrate to 
opposite poles of the cell and spindle fibers develop; and the nucle ar membrane disintegrates)
*Metaphase (Chromatids attach to spindle fibers and line up along  the metaphase plate)
*Anaphase (Chromatids separate and migrate toward opposite poles of the  cell)
*Telophase (The nuclear membrane forms; chromosomes disappear as they u ncoil back to chromatin; 
and nucleoli appear)
*What is cytokinesis? (The cytoplasmic movement that separates two dau ghter cells; cytokinesis
completes the process of cell division)
BSC 2085 LECTURE
7


STUDY GUIDE     Chapter 4
 What is histology? (The study of tissues)
 Name the 4 basic tissue types ( epithelial, connective, muscle, and nervous tissue)
 What is the procedure used by the Pap test? (Scraping cells from  tip of cervix)
 What is exfoliating cytology? (The study of cells shed or removed f rom epithelial surfaces)
 Epithelial T is specialized for: ( covers exposed surfaces, lines internal  passageways and chambers, 
and forms glands)
 Connective tissue is specialized for ( fills internal spaces, provides structural  support for other 
tissues, transports materials within the  body, and stores energy)
 Muscle T is specialized for ( specialized for contraction and includes  the skeletal muscles of the 
body, the muscle of the heart,  and the muscular walls of hollow organs)
 Neural T is specialized for ( carries information from one part of the body to another in the form of 
electrical impulses)
 Epithelial Tissue includes epithelia and glands (True or False )  (T/F)
 Where is epithelia found? ( Epithelia cover every exposed surface of your body. Epithelia  form the
surface of the skin and line the digestive, respiratory,  reproductive, and urinary tracts)
 Name characteristics of the epithelia ( Epithelial tissue is  characterized by polarity, cellularity, attachment,  
avascularity, and  regeneration)
 What is cellularity? ( Epithelia are made almost entirely of cells  bound closely together by 
interconnections known as cell  junctions. In other tissue types, the cells are often widely  separated 
by extracellular materials)
 What is Polarity? (P resence of structural and functional differences  between the exposed and 
attached surfaces)
 What is avascularity? (Lack blood vessels)
 What is regeneration? ( Epithelial cells that are damaged or lost at the  exposed surface are 
continuously replaced through stem  cell divisions in the epithelium)
 What is attachment? ( The base of an epithelium is bound to a thin,  noncellular basement 
membrane)  Name the two functional regions of an epithelial cell? (apical surf ace & 
basolateral surfaces)
 What is the function of the basement membrane? ( The basement  membrane adheres to the 
basal surface and to the  underlying tissues to establish the cell s border and resist  stretching)
 Functions of the epithelial tissue ( Epithelial tissue  provides physical protection, controls permeability , 
provides sensation,  and produces specialized secretions)
 Name the epithelial cells that produce secretions (Glandular ep ithelia)
 Name the specializations of the epithelial cells ( Movement of fluids over the  epithelial surface, 
providing protection and lubrication; (2) the  movement of fluids through the epithelium, to control 
permeability;  or (3) the production of secretions that provide physical  protection or act as chemical 
messengers)
 What is a ciliated epithelium? (Covered by cilia)
 Function of the ciliated epithelium that lines the respiratory tr act (Moves mucus from 
lungs toward the throat)
 Name the specializations adapted for absorption.
 Epithelium is avascular (True or False) TRUE
 The epithelium is connected to the underlying connective tissues by th e basement 
membrane
CAMs on the basolateral surface of an epithelium help bind the cell to the underlying basement 
membrane.
8


 What is the neuroepithelia? ( an epithelium  that is specialized to perform a particular sensory 
function.  Our neuroepithelia contain sensory cells that provide the sensations of smell, taste, sight, 
equilibrium, and hearing)
 What is the function of the secretions discharged on the body surface? ( Exocrine glands)
 Name the intercellular connections ( Intercellular connections involve either extensive areas of 
opposing plasma membranes or specialized attachment sites called cell junctions)
 What is a CAM? ( Cells can attach to other cells or to extracellular protein fibers by means of c ell adhesion 
molecules (CAMs) or at specialized attachment sites called cell junctions)
1- Name the three most common types of cell junctions ( tight junctions, gap junctions, and desmosomes)
2- What is a desmosome? ( cell-to-cell adhesion types and are found in tissue that 
experience intense mechanical stress)
3- Name the different types of desmosomes and their function ( Spot desmosomes  are small discs 
connected to bands of intermediate filaments. The intermediate filaments stabi lize the shape of the cell; 
Hemidesmosomes  resemble half of a spot desmosome. Rather than attaching one cell to another, a 
hemidesmosome attaches a cell to extracellular filaments in the basement membrane . This attachment 
helps stabilize the position of the epithelial cell and anchors it to underlying tissues)
4- Why can we find gap junction in the tissue that requires rapid i ntercellular communication 
(rapid ion & small molecule from cell to cell. When connecting epithelial cells, they help coordin ate such 
functions as the beating  of cilia. In cardiac and smooth muscle tissues, the y are essential for coordinating muscle cell 
contractions. )
1- In the tight junction the lipid portion of the cell membranes are ti ghtly bound together by 
interlocking membrane proteins ( T/F)
2- Function of the tight junctions ( Tight junctions largely prevent water and solutes from passing  
between the cells)
1- Name the strong intercellular connections that hold togethe r the cells (Epithelial cells?)
2- Name the basic shapes of the epithelial cells (Squamous, cuboi dal, columnar)
3- Classify epithelia according to the number of layers (Simple, st ratified) The main function of 
the simple epithelium is mechanical protection (T/ F) (Because they are so thin, simple epithelia are 
fragile. A single  layer of cells cannot provide much mechanical protection,  so simple epithelia are located
only in protected areas inside  the body)
4- The main function of the stratified epithelium is to protect and c over surfaces subjected to 
mechanical and chemical stresses  ( T/F)( Stratified epithelia are generally  located in areas that are 
exposed to mechanical or chemical  stresses   exp. surface of skin, lining of mouth)
5- What is transitional epithelium? ( Its cells can change between being squamous  and cuboidal in shape.
Unlike most epithelia,  it tolerates repeated cycles of stretching without damage. It is  called transitional 
because the appearance of the epithelium  changes as stretching occurs) 
6- Give an example of transitional epithelium (Urinary bladde r, urinary tract)
1- Name what type of epithelium lines the nasal cavity, trache a and bronchi (Pseudostratified 
columnar epithelium)
2- Where is found simple epithelia? ( located only in protected areas inside  the body. They line internal 
compartments and passageways such as the pleural, pericardial, and peritoneal cavitie s; the  heart 
chambers; and blood vessels.
3- Where is found stratified epithelia? ( generally  located in areas that are exposed to mechanical or 
chemical  stresses. The surface of the skin and the lining of the mouth  are examples)
1- Characteristics of the pseudo stratified epithelium ( A columnar epithelium that includes  several 
types of cells with varying shapes and functions; typically have cilia; 
1- Epithelia has always a free surface exposed to the external or i nternal environments  (T/F)
2- What is an endocrine gland? The product of the endocrine gland  is a --------------
3- Function of the hormones.
4- The endocrine glands are ductless glands,(T/F)
5- What is an exocrine gland? .Give examples of exocrine glands .
9


6- Classify the exocrine glands according to the structure
7- The only example of unicellular exocrine glands are the --- -------------------
8- Give examples of exocrine secretions.
9- Classify the exocrine glands according to the mode of secretion. W hat is merocrine, apocrine 
and holocrine secretion?
10- Classify the glands according to the type of secretion.
11- Watery perspiration is one example of what type of secretion?
12- Function of the connective tissue.
13- Name the three types of connective tissue. Give examples of conn ective tissue 
14- Name the basic components of the connective tissue
15- What is the matrix? What is ground substance?
16- The watery ground substance of the blood is the  --------- ------------------
17- Name the components of the connective tissue proper.
18- Function of fibroblasts, Function of fibrocytes.  Function of macrophag es. Function of the 
adipocytes.  Function of the mesenchymal cells.
19- Why liposuction provides only a temporary solution to the problem of e xcess weight?
20- Function of the melanocytes. Function of the mast cells. Function  of the lymphocytes. 
Function of the microphages.
21- Name the two different types of macrophages.
22- Name the different types of microphages.
23- Name the cell types that contain histamine and heparin.
24- Name the cells that increase their # in an infected area.
25- Name the three types of fibers of the connective tissue. The dominan t fibers type in dense 
connective tissue is ---------------------
26- Examples of dense connective tissue.
27- Function of the dense irregular connective tissue.
28- What are a tendon, ligament and aponeurosis? Structures connec ted by them.
29- Name the three major subdivisions of the extracellular fluid f ound in the body.
30- The interstitial fluid that enters a lymphatic vessel is known as l ymph.
31- The framework or stroma of organs such as spleen, liver and lymp h nodes are made up what 
type of fibers.----------------------------------------- ---
32- Blood, bone and cartilage are examples of what type of tissue.
33- osteocytes are cells of the----------and chondrocytes are cell s of the----------
34- The cells that accounts for almost half the volume of blood is the - ----------------
35- Name the different types of cartilage. Give examples of type s of cartilages.
36- Name the most common type of cartilage.
37- Cartilage is separated from surrounding tissues by the -------- -------------, bone is separated from
surrounding tissues by----------------------------------and  organs are separated from surrounding 
tissues by -----------------------
38- Cartilage grows by two mechanisms that are -------------- ------and -----------------
39- What is mesothelium?  Examples of mesothelium. Does the mesothe lium communicate with 
the exterior or not?
40- What is the endothelium?
41- Mucous Membranes line cavities that communicate with the exte rior )(T/F)
42- Give examples of mucous membranes.
43- What is a serous membrane?.  Function of the serous membranes.
44- The reduction of friction in between the parietal and the vis ceral surfaces of internal cavities is 
the function of what type of membrane.
10


45-    Where are found the Peritoneum, Pleura and  Pericardium.- ------
46- Function of the muscle tissue. Types of muscle tissue.
47- Name the two types of muscle tissue that show striations. Type of muscl e tissue that shows no
striations.
48- Neural tissue is specialized for---------------------- - Name the two basic types of cells of the neural
or nervous tissue.
49- The bone is avascular (True or False) The epithelium is avasc ular (T/F) The cartilage is avascular
(T/F)
50- What is the antiangiogenesis factor?
51- What is the inflammatory response?
52- What is a membrane? Function of the membranes. Types of membran e? 
53- Location of the mucous membranes, serous membranes. Synovial mem branes and cutaneous 
membranes.
54- What is dysplasia?
55- What are the tissue changes with age?
Skeletal muscle - Cells are long, cylindrical, striated, and m ultinucleate
   
Cardiac muscle - Cells are short, branched, and striated, usual ly with a single nucleus; cells are 
interconnected by intercalated discs
Smooth muscle - Cells are short, spindle shaped, and nonstriated ,with a single, central nucleus
11


BSC 2085 LECTURE
Study guide.  Chapter 5
1.Name the two major components of the Integumentary system (Cutaneous membrane & 
accessory structures)
2.Components of the cutaneous membrane (Dermis, epidermis)
3.Name and location of the accessory structures (Hair follicles, exocrine glands, nails   located in 
dermis)
4.Hypodermis is considered separated from the Integument ( TRUE  or false) (T/F). 
5.Hypodermis is loose connective tissue, also known as subcutaneous layer and super ficial fascia 
(T/ F)
6.General functions of the skin (Protection of underlying tissues & organs against microbes, 
chemical substances & water loss)(Excretion of salts, water & org anic wastes)(Protection 
against UV radiation by production of melanin)(Temp regulation b y insulation & evaporation)
(Vitamin D3 synthesis)(Detection of touch, pressure, pain & temp)(Storage of energy via 
fat/lipids)(Production of keratin)
12


7.Layers of the epidermis (stratum basale, stratum spinosum, stratum granulosum, s tratum 
lucidum   only in thick skin, stratum corneum)
8.Is the epidermis vascular or avascular ? How does the epidermis obtain nutrients? (Nutrients & 
oxygen diffuse from the capillaries of the dermis)
9.Where are found the epidermal cells with the highest metabolic demands? (Closest to the 
underlying dermis)  Why? (Epidermal cells rely on the diffusion of nutrients & oxygen fr om 
capillaries within the dermis)
10.Name the most abundant epithelial cells (Keratinocytes)
11.Where is found the thin skin? Where is found the thick skin? (Thick skin is only found on the 
sole of the foot & palm of hand   everywhere else is thin sk in)
12.Number of layers in the thin skin (4).  Number of layers in the thick skin (5).
13.The stratum corneum has a much thicker superficial layer in the THIN  skin.
14. The stratum lucidum appears only in the THICK  skin.
15.Name the strata in order from the basal lamina to the surface ( DEEPEST - stratum basale, 
stratum spinosum, stratum granulosum, stratum lucidum   o nly in thick skin, stratum corneum
  SUPERFICIAL)
16.The stratum germinativum is also known as BASALE  layer.
17.Function of the hemidesmosomes found in the basal layer.
18.The pattern of the epidermal ridges forms the fingerprints ( T/F).
19.All strata of the epidermis contain Keratinocytes ( T/F)
20.Name the cells found in the basal layer (Keratinocytes & melanocytes)
21.Function of the stem cells (Replace keratinocytes constantly)
22.Function of the Merkel cells. Where are found the Merkel cells  (Specialized epithelial cells 
sensitive to light touch discrimination; found on hairless skin)
23.Function of the melanocytes. Function of the Melanin (Produce melanin; protects against sun 
damage from UV, gives pigment (color) to our skin)
24.What is albino? Do the albino people have melanocytes? (An albino is an individual who has a 
deficit in the production of melanin & has partial or complete absen ce of pigment in the skin, 
hair & eyes)(Melanocytes are present but do not function)
25.Cells of the stratum spinossum (Langerhans cells)  Functions of the Dendritic (To process antigen 
material & present it on the cell surface to the Tcells of the imm une system)
26.What is insensible perspiration? (Water diffusion across the stratum corneum & evaporates 
from skin)  What is sensible perspiration? (Perspiration excreted in sufficient quantity to appear 
as moisture on the skin)
27.Name the pigments of the epidermis (Carotene & melanin)
28.Where else can we found carotene? (Accumulates in epidermal cells, deep in the dermis and in 
the subcutaneous layer; orange veggies)
29.Carotene can be converted to Vitamin A.
30.Vitamin A is required for normal maintenance of the epithelial tissue  and the synthesis of 
photoreceptors pigments in the eye.
31.Name the areas of the body that have a higher concentration of mel anocytes (Nipples, genitalia,
eyes)
32.Small amount of UV radiations is beneficial ( T/F). Why? Synthesis of vitamin D
33.How do the melanocytes respond to the exposure to the UV radiations? Produce melanin
34.Immediate effects of the UV radiations (Sun tan) Effects of the UV radiations over time (Over 
time can cause skin to darken by increasing melanin production)
13


35.Role of the blood and blood cells in the color of the skin (Blood cells supply the dermis which 
helps with the color of the skin along with the pigments of the  epidermis)
36.What is cyanosis? (Blue tint due to lack of oxygen or blood flow)
37. What is jaundice? (Yellowing of the skin due to buildup of bile produced by liv er; skin & white 
part of eyes turn yellow)
38.What is vitiligo? (Loss of color by loss of melanocytes; condition in which pigmen t is lost from 
areas of the skin, causing whitish patches often with no clear cause)
39.Results of the hyper production of MSH (Melanocyte stimulating horm one)   (Tumors affecting 
the pituitary gland)
40.Basal cell carcinoma originates in the basal  layer.
41.The most common skin cancer is the (Basal Cell Carcinoma)
42.What is a malignant melanoma? (A malignant tumor of melanocytes due to sun exposure   
grows rapidly & metastasizes through lymphatic system)
43.Explain the cancer s key characteristics (Asymmetry   uneven shape; one half of mole doesn t 
match other half)(Border   Irregular & not smooth)(Color   Man y colors in a spot may indicate 
skin cancer; mole of many shades or that has lightened or darkene d)(Diameter   5mm or 
larger is dangerous)(Evolving   Shrinking, growing, changing color, begins to itch or burn)
44.The sunlight causes epidermal cells to convert a steroid into Vitam in D3. ( T/F)
45.What is calcitriol? (Active form of vitamin D, essential for calcium absorption & bone 
mineralization) Where is synthesized the calcitriol? (In the liver & kidneys)  Function of the 
calcitriol? (Required for calcium & phosphate uptake in the small intes tine)
46.What is epidermal growth Factor? (A growth factor that stimulates cell growth, proliferation, & 
differentiation by binding to its receptor EGFR)
47.Name the layers of the Dermis (Papillary & Reticular)  Function of the papillary layer (Support & 
nourishment of the overlaying epidermis)
48.Function of the Reticular layer (Resist tension)
49.What is Dermatitis? (Inflammation of the papillary layer   caused by infection, radiati on, 
mechanical irritation, or chemicals)
50.What is an Ulcer?
51.What is the hypodermis? (Subcutaneous layer deep to dermis) Functions of the hypodermis? 
(Helps to stabilize the position of the skin & allows separate  movement; connects integument 
to the underlying tissues; connected to reticular layer of skin  by connective tissue)
52.Hairs are nonliving structures ( T/F)
53.Hair is composed of what type of cells. Explain. (Keratinocytes)
54.Where is produced the hair? (At the base of the hair follicle)
55.What is the root hair plexus?  (Sensory nerves that surround hair follicle)  Function of it? 
(Anchors into the skin)
56.Function of the arrector pili muscle? (Involuntary smooth muscle that contracts & causes hair 
to stand up producing goose bumps)
57.What is medulla of the hair? (Central core)  What is the cortex? (Middle layer)  What is the cuticle
of the hair? (Surface layer)
58.What is Lanugo? (Thin, soft hair found on fetus or newborns)  Types of hair in the adults (Vellus 
  fine, soft hair found on body surface)(Terminal   on scalp, eyebr ows, eyelashes, axillary & 
pubic area)
59.Sebaceous are holocrine glands ( T/F) - 
60.Sebaceous glands discharge into the hair follicle ( T/F)
61.Sebaceous follicles are large sebaceous glands that are not associated  with the hair follicle. ( T/F)
62.The lipid secreted by the sebaceous gland is known as sebum .
14


63.What is Seborrheic dermatitis? (Inflammation around abnormally active sebaceous glands, 
most often in the scalp (area becomes red & oily   cradle cap in i nfants, dandruff in adults)
64.Why is the dermatitis painful? (Because of the abundance of sensory nerve endings & recepto rs
in the skin)
65.Name the two types of sweat glands of the skin (Apocrine & Merocrine)
66.Where are found the apocrine glands? (Axilla, groin, nipples)  What type of sweat gland 
produces an intense odor? (Apocrine)
67.Where are located the merocrine glands? (They are widely distributed on body surface by 
mostly found on palms & soles) Where is found the highest number of merocrine glands?
68.Functions of merocrine sweat gland activity (Temp control, excreting water & electrolytes, 
protection from environmental hazards)
69.What is the location of the ceruminous gland? (Ear)
70.Nail production occurs at the nail root ( T/F)
71.The cuticle is also known as eponychyum ( T/F)
72.Name the steps involved in repairing the integument following  an injury. (Inflammatory, 
Migratory, Proliferation, Scarring)(Bleeding, mast cells re lease heparin & histamines triggering 
inflammation   swelling & pain, scab formation protects area, phagocytes clean  area, 
fibroblasts & epidermal cells move along edges of wound, divide & form granulation tissue)  
What is a scab? (Dried blood clot)
73.What is: granulation tissue (Combination of blood clot, fibroblasts, & extensive capillary  
network at the base of a wound)  Scar tissue (Formation of inflexible, fibrous, noncellular 
tissue)  Keloid (Thick raised area of scar tissue)  Callus (Localized thickening of epidermis due to 
chronic mechanical stress)
74.What is a tattoo (Enhance appearance of integument)  When the tattoo is removed, scars ofen 
remain. ( T/F)
75.Name the effects of aging (Thinning of epidermis   more injury/infection, dendritic cells 
reduced by 50% increasing damage & infection, vitamin D3 decrease s   less calcium & 
phosphate absorption, melanocytes less active   more sunburns   increased risk for skin 
cancer)
BSC 2085 LECTURE
STUDY GUIDE   
  Chapter 6 Osseous Tissue.
1-Give the 5 primary functions of the Skeletal System (Protection, blood cell production, support, 
storage of minerals & lipids, movement/leverage)
2-Describe a long bone (They have a slender pole-like shaft called diaphysis and two wide  ends 
called epiphysis (Femur, metacarpal, etc.).
3-Short bone  (They are small box-like bones, such as the carpals and the tars al bones)
4-Flat bone  (They are thin bones sandwich-like with an inner and outer laye r of compact bone with
a thin later of spongy bone in between (skull bones, sternum, shoulder blades, etc.).
5-Irregular bone (They have an asymetrical shape that can be short, flat, and with po inted surfaces 
(vertebra, pelvis, etc.).
6-Name the  4 bones that contain Para nasal sinuses (Frontal, ethmoid, sphenoid, maxillary)
7-What is a sesamoid bone. Give an example of sesamoid bone. (They are small bones sesame seed-
like that arise within membranes or tendons (kneecap).
15


8-Name all the bone cells. Give the function of: the Osteocytes (mature bone cells that maintain 
protein and the mineral content of the bone matrix. They do n ot divide. They are found in 
cavities called lacuna and have cytoplasmatic exensions that pas s through canaliculi. They also 
help to repair damaged bone)
9-OSTEOBLASTS   SYNTHESIZE via osteogenesis & OSTEOCLASTS   DISSO LVE via  osteolysis (They 
produce new bone matrix during the process of osteogenesis (oss ification) and eventually 
become osteocytes. Osteoid is the matrix that has not been ca lcified)
10-Osteoclasts (Large multinucleated cells that produce acids and protein-di gesting enzymes that 
dissolve the bone matrix which is absorbed and removed to relea se primarily calcium when 
blood calcium levels are low (maintain homeostasis).
11-Osteoprogenitor cells (They are mesenchymal cells that become osteoblasts and are located in 
the inner cellular layer of the periosteum and endosteum. They  assist in fracture repair)
1- List the Organic components of the matrix (Mostly collagen)  List the Inorganic Components (Ca, K, 
Na, Mg, Carbonate, P)
2- Name the largest bone cells? (Osteoclast)  Name the mature bone cells (Osteocyte)  Name the 
most abundant bone cells (Osteocyte)
3- What is a lacuna? (Depressions in bone matrix that contain osteocytes) What type of cell contains
the lacuna? (Osteocyte)  How many cells contain the lacuna? (One)
4- Describe the canaliculi. Give the function of the canalicu li. (Narrow like channels that form 
pathways for blood vessels & allows exchange of nutrients & was te)
5- What is Osteolysis? (Dissolve bone matrix & release stored minerals; think osteo clasts)  What is 
Osteogenesis? (Produce new bone matrix, also known as ossification; think osteob lasts)
6- Name the two types of Osseous Tissue? (Compact & spongy/cancellous)
7- What type of osseous tissue reduces the weight of the skeleton? (Spongy)
8- What type of bone is adapted to withstand stresses that arrive from  a limited range the directions?
(Compact)
9- What is the periosteum? BONE COVERED BY PERIOSTEUM & LINED W ITH ENDOSTEUM (Dense 
layer of vascular connective tissue that envelopes all bones e xcept joints; involved in bone 
growth & repair) What is the endosteum? (An incomplete covering that lines medullary cavities; 
active in bone growth, repair & remodeling)
10- What is the location of the osteoprogenitor cells? (Located in inner cellular layer of the 
periosteum & endosteum; assist in fracture repair)
11- Where are the osteoclasts more numerous? (When blood calcium is low ???)
12- Name the 4 tissue types (Epithelial, connective, muscle, neural)
13- The Bone tissue belongs to which of the 4 tissue types? (Connective)
14- Is the bone tissue vascular or a vascular? (Vascular)  
15- What is the location of the central  canal? (Run parallel to surface of bone)  Name the structure 
contained within the central canal (Contains one or more blood vessels   normally a capillary & 
venule that carry blood to and from the osteon)
16- What is the position of the perforating  canal? (Run perpendicular to surface)  
17- Which structure is characteristic of compact bone? (The matrix of the bone is very dense and 
contains deposits of calcium salts; The matrix of the bone co ntains osteocytes; Narrow channels 
pass through the matrix to allow for an exchange of nutrients)
18- What is the functional unit of the compact bone? (Osteon)
19- What is the Osteon? (Structural units of mature compact bone)  What is the Haversian system? 
(Osteon)
20- What is the position of the Osteon in relation to the diaphysis? (Parallel)
16


21- What are the trabeculae? (Open network; Interconnecting tiny arches of bone tissue found i n 
spongy bone)  What type of osseous tissue contains the trabeculae? (Spongy)
22- Describe the position of the concentric lamellae (Around central canal; surround osteon) Describe
the position of the interstitial lamellae (Fill the spaces between the osteons)  Describe the position
of the circumferential lamellae (Wrapped around long bones & bind osteons together; at out er & 
inner bone surfaces)
23- Name the different parts of the long bone (Diaphysis (shaft) filled with compact bone & the 
epiphysis filled with spongy bone, also metaphysis & medullary ca vity) The shaf of the long 
bone is called (Diaphysis)  The upper end of the long bone is name (Epiphysis) The lower end  of the
long bone is called (Epiphysis)
24- The region that connects diaphysis and epiphysis is the (Metaphysis)
25-  What is the location of the yellow marrow? (Medullary cavity & spaces within spongy bone)  
What is the location of the red marrow?  (Medullary spaces & cavity within spongy bone within 
the epiphysis of long bones)
26- Function of the yellow marrow (Lipid storage) Function of the red marrow (Blood cell formation)  
27- What is Calcification? (Process of depositing calcium salts within a tissue)  What is Ossification? 
(or Osteogenesis   process of bone formation)
28- Name the different types of Ossification (Intramembranous/Dermal & Endochondrial (from 
cartilage)
29- Concept of Intramembranous Ossification (Begins when osteoblasts differentiate within 
connective tissue; normally occurs in the dermis)
30- Give examples of Intramembranous Ossification (Produces dermal bones such as mandible, 
clavicle or collar bone)
31- Concept of Endochondral Ossification (Cartilage model that is gradually replaced by bone at 
metaphysis; bone length increases)
32- What is Interstitial Growth? (Growth in length)  What is Appositional Growth (Bone diameter 
increases)
33- From what type of cells begins the Intramembranous Ossification (Osteoblasts)
34- From what type of tissue starts the Intramembranous Ossification? (Mesenchymal or fibrous 
connective tissue)
35- Function of the Growth Hormone (Stimulates protein synthesis & cell growth throughout body 
with special emphasis on hard tissues - Stimulates bone growth)
36- Function of the Thyroxin? (This is produced by the thyroid gland; this hormone stimulates  cell 
metabolism in general and specifically increases the activity of os teoblasts - Stimulates bone 
growth)
37- Function of the Sex hormones? (Sex hormones help maintain a normal rate of bone deposition. 
The lack of estrogen after menopause results in osteoporosis in a higher percentage of women 
compared to men of the same age)(They also speed growth & closure of  epiphyseal cartilages at 
puberty)
38- Function of the Calcitonin Hormone (Calcitonin lowers blood calcium levels  first by inhibiting 
osteoclasts activity thus allowing more calcium to be deposit ed in the bones and second by 
increasing the loss of calcium via the kidneys)
39- Function of the Parathyroid Hormone (Main hormone that regulates calcium ion homeostasis) 
(PTH increases calcium ion levels)
40- Function of the Testosterone in bone growth (At puberty testosterone/estrogen increase the rate 
at which at which osteoblasts produce bone)
41-  What is the most abundant mineral in the Human bone? (Calcium)
42- What percent of calcium forms the bone? (99%???)
17


43- Explain the relation between Gigantism and excess of growth horm one prior to puberty (If the 
growth hormone level rises abnormally after epiphyseal cartilag es close, the skeleton does not 
grow longer. Instead, bones get thicker, especially in the fa ce, jaw, and hands. Cartilage growth 
and alterations in soft tissue structure lead to changes in physi cal features, such as the contours 
of the face. These physical changes take place in the disorder  called acromegaly)
44- Function of the Articular Cartilage (Cover articulating surfaces   bony surfaces at a synovial joint 
cannot contact one another)
45- Concept of Fracture (Crack or break in bone)
46- Name the steps of the process of bone repair (Hematoma formation, callus formation, Spongy 
bone formation, compact bone formation)
47- Give the function of Vitamin D in relation with Calcium (Calcium & phosphate absorption)
48- Name the vitamins necessaries for proper bone formation? (Vitamin D3, Vitamin C, Vitamin A, 
Vitamin K & B12)
49- What is the calcitriol? (Hormone produced in kidneys required for normal absorption of ca lcium 
& phosphorus in GI system)  What is the primary source of calcitriol? (Kidneys)
50- What is the effect of calcitriol on Skeletal System? (Maintains serum calcium levels by increasing 
calcium absorption in the GI system)
51- What is the relation between strength of the bone and a lack  of exercises? (Bone degenerates 
faster when inactive)
52- What is Osteopenia? (Reduced bone calcification)
53- What is the non-pathologic loss of bone that occurs with aging? (Osteopenia)
54- What is Osteoporosis? (Severe bone mass loss that affects normal function)  What is the primary 
reason that accelerates osteoporosis afer menopause in women? (Lack of estrogen after 
menopause results in osteoporosis)
55- What is Osteomalacia? (Bones appear normal but are weak & flexib le due to poor mineralization) 
What is Rickets? (A form of osteomalacia affecting children, generally due to vit amin D3 
deficiency caused by poor sun exposure)
56- What condition would you possibly observe in a child who is suffering  from rickets? (Bones are 
flexible, bend laterally, bowlegged)
57- What is the epiphyseal plate? (Cartiligous area between epiphysis & diaphysis of a growing  bone)
What is the meaning of the epiphyseal lines (Remains after epiphyseal closure   growth has 
ended)
58- Where does growth in length occur? (Endochondral Ossification)
59-Name the vitamins essential for normal adult bone maintenance an d repair (Vitamin c & D3)
60- Name the hormones that coordinate the storage absorption and excr etion of calcium ions 
(Calcitonin & PTH)
61- Which three organs or tissues interact to assist in the regulation  of Calcium ion concentration in 
body fluids? (Bones, GI tract, kidneys)
18


Study Guide
Chapter 9  Articulations.
1.What is an articulation? (Joint   connections between bones of the skeletal system; pe rmit 
movement at joint or lock 2 bones together for stability & prot ection) 
2.What is a synarthrosis? (Immovable joint   structures joined by fibrous tissue or cartilage)
3.What is a diarthrosis or synovial? (Freely movable joints at end of long bones surrounded by 
capsule containing synovial fluid)
4.What is an amphiarthrosis? (Slightly movable joint   structures connected by cartilage or fibrous 
ligaments)
5.A slightly movable joint is amphiarthrosis , a freely movable joint is diarthrosis , and a nonmovable 
joint is a synarthrosis .
6.What is a synostosis? (Fused bones such as in the metopic suture of the frontal bone &  epiphyseal 
line of long bones)  A joint formed by the fusion of two bones.
7.A suture is an example of synarthrosis; fibrous joint
8.An epiphyseal line is an example of a synostosis
9.Name the three types of fibrous joints (suture, syndesmosis, gomphosis)
10.Give one example of suture (Between the bones of the skull)
11.The joint that binds the teeth to the bony socket is an example of gomph osis. ( T, F)
12.A ligamentous connection such as interosseous ligament is an example of s yndesmosis ( T, F)
13.The synovial joints are all diarthrosis. True  or false?.
14.Give the characteristics of the synovial joints (Freely movable)
15.Where is secreted the synovial fluid? (Synovial membrane)
16.Give all the functions of the synovial fluid (Lubrication, nutrient distribution, shock absorption)
17.The synovial fluid resembles interstitial fluid ( true  or false). The synovial fluid contains a higher 
concentration of proteoglycans ( T or F). The synovial fluid is secreted by fibroblasts of the synovial 
membrane ( T or F). The synovial fluid is a lubricant?  ( T, F ). The synovial fluid is a viscous solution? 
(T/F)  The synovial fluid reduce friction? ( True  or false)
18.Give the characteristics of the surfaces of the articular cartil ages. (Resembles hyaline cartilage; no 
perichondrium; contains more water than other cartilages; sm ooth & slick)
19.The Articular cartilage consist of Hyaline cartilage ( T or F),              
20.Functions of the articular cartilages (Prevents bone from touching, reduces friction) 
21.What is the meniscus? (A pad of fibrocartilage located between opposing bones within  a synovial 
joint)
22.Location of the meniscus (Knee) Function of the meniscus (Subdivide synovial cavity
channel the flow of synovial fluid; Allow for variations in the shapes of  the articular surfaces)
23.The meniscus allow variation of shapes of the articular surfaces ( True  or false)
24.What ligament reinforces the lateral surface of the knee? (Fibular collateral ligament)
25.What ligament reinforces the medial surface of the knee joint? (Tibular collateral ligament)
26.The ligament that limit anterior posterior movement of the fem ur and maintain the alignment of the
femur and the femoral and tibial condyles are the cruciate liga ments ( true  or false)
27.The back of the knee joint is reinforced by popliteal ligaments, (T, F)
28.Name the ligament that attaches the patella to the tibial tube rosity (Ligamentum patellae)
29.Why the complete dislocation of the knee is an extremely rare even t? (The knee contains seven 
major ligaments)
19


30.What is a bursae? (Pockets of synovial fluid)  Function of the bursae? (Cushion areas where tendons 
or ligament rub; lined by synovial membrane; form where tend ons or ligaments rubs against other 
tissues)
31.Classify the following synovial joints according to their shapes.
32.Name the joint that allows the greatest range of mobility of any joi nt in the body (Shoulder or 
glenohumeral joint)
33.The ligament that joints the coracoid process and the acromial proce ss is the (Coracoacromial joint)
34.The healing process leaves a weakness that increases the changes f or future dislocations ( True  or 
false)
35.The intervertebral disks consist of fibrocartilage ( true  or false)
36.Functions of the Intervertbral disks (To allow slight movement of the vertebrae, and acts as a 
ligament to hold the vertebrae together. Their role as shock  absorbers in the spine, is crucial)
37.Name the two parts of the intervertebral disk (annulus fibrosus, nucleus pulposus)
38.What causes a herniated disk? (If nucleus pulposus breaks through the anulus fibrosus, it ma y 
protrude into the vertebral canal)
39.Why in aging process the vertebral column decreases in height ? (Bone mass decreases; Bones 
weaken; Increases risk of bone fracture; Increases risk of bone  dislocation; We lose bone strength; 
We lose muscle tone; Physically demanding tasks are more diffi cult)
40.Classify the hip joint according to the shape (Ball & socket)
41.The coxal joint contains a labrum. The labrum increases the de pth of the joint ( true  or false)
42.The hip joint is also known as coxal ( True  of False)
43.Name the articular surfaces that form the coxal joint (Head of femur & acetabulum of hip bone)
44.The ligament of femoral head (teres) is attached to the fovea ca pitis of the head of the femur and 
the acetabulum ( true  or false)
45.Name the joint between the Hip Bones ad the Sacrum (Sacro-iliac)
46.Describe the movements:  Adduction (Toward midline),  Abduction (Away from midline) , Opposition 
(When thumb moves towards palm to grasp object) , Pronation (Wrist & hand face posteriorly) , 
Supination (Wrist & hand face anteriorly) . Inversion (Turning inward   like twisting foot sole 
inward) , Eversion (Turning outward) , Dorsiflexion (Flexion at ankle joint & elevation of sole   flex 
toes upward) , Plantar flexion (Extend ankle joint & elevate heel   tiptoe),  Protraction (Movement 
of body part anteriorly in horizontal plane   jut chin forward) , Retraction (Reverse movement   
bring jaw back to normal position) . Circunduction (Movement at synovial joint in which distal end 
of bone moves in circular direction but shaft does not rotate) , Hyperextension (Extension of body 
part past anatomical position) and Depression (Move structure inferiorly   open mouth) . Give 
examples.
47.Turning of the sole inward is termed inversion . Turning if the sole outward is termed eversion . 
48.Give examples of hyperextension ( Moving neck backwards towards spine; moving wrist up towards
radius/ulna)
49.Curling into the fetal position is an example of flexion ( T,F)
50.Dorsiflexion and Plantar flexion involve only moving the foot ( T,F)
51.To pinch with a thumb and finger involves a movement called opposition
52.Which movement would you associate with chewing food? (Elevation)
53.Which foot movement enables the ballerina to stand on her toes? (Plantar flexion)
54.Nodding your head Yes is an example of which movements? (Flexion)
55.The opposite movement of medial rotation is lateral
56.The opposite movement of pronation is supination
57.The opposite movement of plantar flexion is dorsiflexion
58.The opposite movement of elevation is depression
20


59.How do you classify the synovial joints according to the number of axis? (gliding, hinge, pivot, 
condylar, saddle, ball-and-socket)
60.In a monoaxial articulation a movement can occur in how many axes? (1)
61.In a bi axial joint the movement can occur in how many axes? (2)
62.In a triaxial joint, movements can occur in how many axes? (3)
63.What is a luxation? (Dislocation - articulating surfaces forced out of position - damag es articular 
cartilage, ligaments, joint capsule)
64. Why are luxations painful? (Tear???)
65.The joint that permits the greatest range of mobility of any joint i n the body is the shoulder joint - 
glenohumeral
Study Guide.      Muscle Tissue.   Chapter 10.
                                                                          m (muscle)
                                                                          mm (muscles)
1. The skeletal mm are organs (True or false)
2. Each cell in the skeletal m tissue is a single m fiber. (True or false).  The skeletal m cell is also 
known as ---------------------------
3. The cell membrane of the skeletal m cell is known as ----------- -----. 
The cytoplasm of the skeletal m cell is also known as  ---------------
4.  Explain all the functions of the skeletal mm. 
5. Name the 4 primary tissue types. Name the three types of m tissue.
6. Give the location of the Cardiac m tissue. Characteristics of the  Cardiac m tissue. Function of the 
Cardiac m tissue
7.  Location of the skeletal m tissue.  Functions of the skeletal m tissue. Char acteristics of the 
skeletal m cells.
8.   Location of the Smooth m tissue.  Function of the Smooth m tissue.  Characteris tics of the 
Smooth m cells.
9. Muscle tissue consists of cells that are highly specialized for contra ction (T,F)
10. What are epimysium, perimysium and endomysium? Name the lay ers of connective tissue that 
surround: the entire muscle, the fascicle and the muscle cell.                                                        
11. What is a fascicle?
12. The perimysium contains blood vessels and nerves that maintain b lood flow and innervate the m
fibers within the fascicles.( T or F). Endomysium contains blood ve ssels (capillaries) (T or F).  Give 
the function of the capillaries. 
13.  What are the satellite cells?  Where are located the satellite  cells? Function of the satellite cells. 
21


14.  What is a tendon? At each end of the muscle, the collagen fibers of  epimysium, perimysium and 
endomysium come together to form a ------------------. The bund le of collagen fibers at the end of 
a skeletal muscle that attaches the muscle to the bone is a --------- --------- The contraction of a 
muscle exerts a pull on a bone because muscles are attached to bones by tendons. (T, F)
15.  What is an aponeurosis? Aponeuroses attach muscle to muscle (T, F). Lig aments attach bone to 
bone (T, F)
16. Skeletal m cells contract under the influence of the Centra l Nervous System (T/F)
17. Many Skeletal mm are ofen called voluntary mm because we ha ve voluntary control over their 
contractions. (T or F). The diaphragm usually works outside our consci ous awareness. T or F
18. Axons penetrate the epimysium,:----- branch through the p erimysium and enter the endomysium
to innervate m fibers (T or F)
19.  The skeletal muscle cell consist of: --------------------- --------
20. What is a myofibril? The myofibril is as long as the entire cell (T or F)
21. Each skeletal m cell or fiber contains hundreds to thousands  of myofibrils (T or F)
22.  The myofibrils consist of: ------------------------------- ----------
23. Myofibrils which can actively shorten are responsible for skelet al m contraction (T or F)
24. At each end of the skeletal m cell the myofibrils are anchored  to the --------------. Since each 
myofibrill is attached at either end of the muscle fiber, when sarcome re shortens, the muscle 
fiber shortens. (T, F)
25. What is the sarcoplasmic reticulum?  Location of the sarcoplasmic  reticulum. 
26.  What is the advantage of having many nuclei? The genes in the nuclei of the skeletal m cells 
control the production of enzymes and structural proteins require d for normal muscle 
contraction (T or F)
27.  What are the myoblasts? Are the myoblasts embrionic cells? Why a re the skeletal muscle cells 
multinucleated?. Skeletal muscle cells are different from typi cal cells in that muscle fibers are 
multinucleated (T, F)
28. Because skeletal muscle contractions demand large quantities o f ATP , skeletal muscles have a 
rich blood supply and abundants mitochondrias (T, F)
29. Testosterone is a hormone that stimulates directly growth of musc le tissue, leading to increase 
muscle mass (T, F)
22


30. Each nucleus in a skeletal m cell reflects the contribution of a sin gle myoblast (T or F). Why?  
What is a satellite cell?
31. Even though the skeletal m cell is very large, all regions of t he cell must contract simultaneously. 
The signal is conducted trough the ------------------------- ---------
32. What are the Transverse tubules (TT)? T tubules are filled wit h --------------------.Function of the 
TT. Transverse tubules encircle the sarcomere (T or F). T Tubu les have the same properties as the 
sarcolemma (T or F) . The action potential is conducted into a skeletal  muscle fibers by T Tubules.
(T, F)
33. Action potential are the triggers for m. contraction (T or F)
34.  What are terminal cisternae?  What is a content of the termin al cisternae?
35. The calcium concentration inside the T cisternae is 1000 hig her than the Ca inside the 
sarcoplasm (T or F)
36. The m contraction begins when the stored Ca ions are released into t he sarcoplasm.  (True or F)
37. What is a sarcomere? Function of the sarcomere. Interactions betwe en actin and myosin 
filaments of the sarcomere are responsible for muscle contraction (T,  F)
38. Thin filaments are composed of------------Thick filaments a re composed of---------
39. The A Band contains what type of filaments. The I band contai ns what type of filaments?
40. The I band extends from -------band of one sarcomere to the ----- -band of the next
41.  The length of the A band is equal to the length of a typical thic k filament (T or F)
42. What is the M line? Function of the M line.
43. The H zone contains only ---------------------filaments .
44. What is the zone of overlap? 
45.  What is the Z line? The Z line is responsible of the banded appear ance (striations) that are 
visible with the light microscope. (T or F). Thin filaments are a nchored here (T, F)
46. The Skeletal m is known as striated m (T or F). Striations reflec t the Z lines(T,F)
47. What is a triad? Triads  are located in the zones of overlap at th e edges of the a band.(T or F)
48. Calcium is released by the sarcoplasmic reticulum and enters th e regions where thick and thin 
filaments can interact.
49.  The thin filaments  contains 4 proteins that are: ----------- -----------
23


50. F actin consists of two rows of individual globular molecules of------ -----------. Each G actin 
molecule contains an active site that can bind to ---------------- -----. The function of the 
tropomyosin is ------------------------------------------ ---.
51. A troponin consists of three globular subunits, one subunit binds to ------------------, other subunit 
binds to ------------------------------------another sub unit has a receptor that binds a 
----------------------ion.
52. A thick filament contains ------------------molecules.  Th e myosin molecule has head 
and--------------------.
53. What is a cross bridge. When the myosin heads interact with thi n filaments during a contraction 
it is known as --------------------------------------
54. The connection between head and tail functions as a hinge that l ets the head pivots at its base (T
or F). The pivoting is the key step in m contraction (T or F)
55. The according with the sliding filament theory  when a skelet al m fiber contracts:                    The 
H zones and I band get------------(larger or smaller),     The zone s of overlap get------------------------, 
The Z lines move close together., and   The width of the A band remain  constant.
56. What is a neuromuscular junction?. Each skeletal muscle fiber i s controlled by a motor neuron at
a single--------------------------------------------- -
57. What is a motor unit?
58. What is a synaptic terminal? The cytoplasm of the synaptic  terminal contains mitochondria and 
vesicles filled with Acetylcholine (T, F) 
59. Synaptic vesicles contain neurotransmitters that are released b y exocytosis (T, F)
60.   What is the acetylcholine? Function of the acetylcholine. When  acetylcholine binds to receptors
at the motor end plate, the end plate becomes more permeable to Na ion s. (T, F)
61. What is a synaptic clef? What is a motor end plate?
62. The motor end plate contains receptors that bind Acetylcholine (T /F)
63. What is the Muscle tone?
64. What is an isotonic contraction? What is an isometric contraction ?
65. The Clostridium tetani causes the disease called Tetanus (T,F)
66. The muscle weakness of myasthenia gravis results from: loss of ace tylcholine in the end plate 
membrane.(T, F)
24


67. A drug that blocks acetylcholine receptors at the motor end pla te affect skeletal muscle and 
would cause muscle paralysis. (T, F)
68. The aerobic metabolism provides 95 % of the ATP demands of a res ting cell. (T/F). During the 
aerobic metabolism the mitochondria absorbs oxygen (T or F )
69. The anaerobic process does not require oxygen (T or F)
70. During activities requiring aerobic endurance, most of the mus cle s energy is produced in 
mitochondria (T, F)
71. At resting, muscle generates most of its ATP by aerobic metaboli sm of fatty acids (T,F)
72. Heat energy produced from muscle contraction is released by t he integumentary system (T,F)
73. What is plasticity?
74.  What is rigor mortis?
Study guide.     Neural Tissue.   (Chapter 12).
    Nerve (one)  n 
           (Plural)   Nn   
    True or False (T/F)
    Autonomic Nervous System -ANS
    Central Nervous System   CNS
    Peripheral Nervous System - PNS      
    Nervous System - NS 
    Muscle   m
    Muscles - mm                           
   Neuroglias are glial cells.
1- Give all the functions of the Nervous System. To direct long-term  functions is not a function of 
the Nervous system (T/F)
2- The Nervous System, includes all the Nervous Tissue of the body (T/F )
3- The Anatomical division of the Nervous S consists of:  CNS and PNS  (T/ F) 
4- The Central part of the N S consists of. The Brain and the S --- ------------------  
5- The peripheral Nervous system consists of Ganglia and nerves (T/ F). The cranial nn are 
connected to the ------------while the spinal nerves are conn ected to the -----
6- All the neuron tissue outside the CNS comprises PNS (T or F)
25


7- What is white matter? Components of the white matter
8- What is gray matter? Components of the gray matter.
9- The Peripheral Nervous system consists of the Afferent and the  Efferent division (T/F) 
10- What are the receptors? Classify the receptors. 
11- Name the components of the efferent division.
12- The Somatic nervous system controls skeletal mm  while the ANS controls---------
13- The bundle of axons in the PNS is known as nerves (T/F) while th e bundle of axons in the Spinal 
cord are called tracts (T/F)
14- What is a ganglion? What type of neurons contains the ganglia? W hat type of glial cells contains 
the ganglia?
15- The autonomic nervous System  includes two divisions that are:--- ------------and -----------------
16- The afferent division of the NS brings info to the CNS . The sensory division of the NS brings 
sensory info to the CNS .  The afferent and the sensory division are the same (T or F)
17- The efferent portion of the N S brings info from the CNS . The motor division brings info from the 
CNS.   Are motor and efferent divisions the same?
18- The efferent or  motor division carries motor commands to skeletal, smooth, cardiac mm  and 
glands (T/F)
19- The ANS provides involuntary control over smooth mm, glandula r and cardiac activity  (T/F)
20- What is a neuroglia? 
21- Name the different types of glial cells. 
22- Function of every type of glial cells. Memory is not a function  of the glial cells (T/F)
23- What types of glial cells are found in the CNS? What types of glial  cells are found in the PNS?
24- Astrocytes are the largest and must numerous glial cells (T, F) The least numerous glial cells are 
---------- 
25- The smallest neuroglias in the CNS are microglias (T/F)
26- The myelin sheet that surround the axons of the neurons in the C NS are formed by       
The myelin sheets that surround the axon of the neurons in the PNS a re formed 
by          
27- Function of the Schwann cells. Function of the oligodendrocytes.
26


28- Function of the astrocytes. Function of the Microglia?
29- The two types of neuroglia in the PNS are Schwann cells and Sat ellite cells  (T/F) 
30-   Function of the satellite cells. Satellite cells surround the  neurons in ganglia (T/F). The glial cells 
that surround the cells bodies of peripheral neurons are satellit e cells (T or F)
31- Function of the myelin.
32- What is wallerian degeneration?
33- Characteristics of the functional repair in the PNS and in t he CNS                             
34- In PNS Schwan cells participate in the repair of damaged nn by forming a cellular cord that 
directs axonal regrowth (T/F)
35- Demyelination is associated with numbness and paralysis associated  w ith degenerative process 
(T/F)
36- Excessive damage to oligodendrocytes in the CNS could result in:  loss of sensations and motor 
control (T/F) 
37- Schwan cells form the neurilemma of axons of neurons in the PNS (T /F)
38- Microglia are small phagocytes that engulf cell debris a nd pathogens in the CNS (T or F)
39- Neuroglia account for half of the volume of the NS (T or F)
40- The type of glial cells found lining spinal canal and the vent ricles are the  ..What is the function
of the ependimal cells?
41- Functions of the cerebrospinal fluid?
42- What is the basic functional unit of the Nervous System?
43- The basic function of the Nervous System is the transmission of the  nerve impulses (T/F)
44- Function of the dendrites. Function of the axon.
45- Classification of the neurons according to the structure: anaxoni c, bipolar, unipolar and 
multipolar. 
46- Describe the anaxonic neuron.Neurons thar are rare, small a nd lack features that distinguish 
dendrites from axons are called------------------------ -----
47-  . Describe the unipolar neuron. Neurons in which dendritic and axonal processes are continuous
and the soma lies of to one side are called---------------------- ---------------
27


48- Describe the bipolar neuron. Neurons that have one axon and on e dendrite are 
called-----------------------
49-  . Describe the multipolar neuron. Neurons that have one axon an d several dendrites are 
called------------
50- The bipolar neurons are found in the special sense organs. The multi polar are found in the CNS.  
The unipolar are found in the PNS and the anaxonic are found in th e Brain (T/F) 
51- The most abundant neurons in the CNS are the multipolar neurons. (T/F)
52- Name the organelles contained in the neuron.
53- The cytoskeleton of the perikaryon contains neurotubules, neurofi laments, neurofibrills, 
mitochondrias (T/F) 
54- Most neurons lack centrioles, it explains why the neurons can not  regenerate (T/ F)
55- The cytoplasm that surrounds the nucleus of the neuron is called  perikaryon (T/F) 
56- The cytoplasm of the axon is called axoplasma (T/F) 
57- What is the neurilemma? What is axolemma? 
58- Aggregations of fixed and free ribosomes are called Nissl Bodies (T /F) 
59- The part of the cell that connects the soma with the axon is  called. ------------ Function of the 
axon hillock.
60- Branches that sometimes occur along the length of the axon are call ed-------
61- Sensor neurons of the PNS are unipolar (Y/F)
62- Classify the neurons according to their function.
63- Sensory neurons belong to the afferent division of the NS. 
64- Motor neurons belong to the efferent division of the NS. (T/F)
65- The neuron that deliver info to the CNS are Sensory (T/F). The ne uron that carry instructions 
from the CNS to peripheral effectors are motor (T/F)
66- What are the interneurons? Where are found the interneurons?
67- The peripheral ganglia contains sensory neurons (true or false). 
68- Fine extensions at the end of the axon terminals are called-- ----------.What is a telodendria? What
is a synaptic knob?What is a synaptic vesicle?
28


69- Neurotransmitter for release is stored in synaptic vesicles (T/F )
70- The ion that triggers the release of Ach into the synaptic cl ef is Calcium (T/F) 
71- What is a synapse? What is a pre synaptic neuron? What is the post sy naptic neuron? How is 
named the site of intercellular communication between neurons?
72-  Different types of synapses. What is the most common type of synapse i n the nervous system? 
Chemical or electrical?
73- What is axoplasmic transport?. Types of axoplasmic transport.
74- The rabies virus travels to the Central Nervous System via--- ------------------
75- The neurotransmitter released by adrenergic synapses is the nor  epinephrine. The 
neurotransmitter released by cholinergic synapse is Acetlcholin e (T/F) 
76- The effect that a neurotransmitter has in the post synaptic me mbrane depends on the 
characteristics of the receptor (T or F)
77- Integral membrane proteins that connect electrical cyna pses are called connexons (T/F) 
78- The rate of impulse conduction is greater in what type of fibers? In t ype A, B or C fibers.
79- Where is the rate of impulse conduction greater? In myelinated or  unmyelinated fibers? In axons
with more or in axons with less diameter?
80- The following influence the time necessary for a n. impulse to b e transmitted: diameter of the 
axon, presence of myelin and presence or absence of nodes (T/F) 
81- What is a resting potential?
82- What is action potential?  An action potential traveling alon g the axon is called a nerve impulse 
(T/F)
83- Classify the neurotransmitters according to their function.
84- Nor epinephrine is found in the brain and portions of the Autonomic  nervous system. (T/F)
85- Dopamine is involve in Parkinson  disease (true or false)
86- Serotonin is a neurotransmitter related to emotional states.(t or f)
87- GABA is related to the reduction of anxiety. (T/F) 
88- Why is important the ATP for the neuron? How does the cell obt ain the ATP?
89- What is continuous conduction?. What is saltatory conduction?
29


90- Channel that are always open are known asleak channels (T/F)  
91- Voltage-gated channels are present in the membrane that cov ers the axons (T/F) 
92- The sodium- potassium ion exchange pump moves Na/K opposite to the di rections of their 
electrochemical gradients (T/F) 
93- Ions can move across the plasma membrane in which of the following wa ys: - through passive 
channels, through leak channels, through chemically gated chan nels, by ATPdependent ion 
pumps and through voltage gated channels (T/F) 
94- Other chemicals released by synaptic knobs are neuromodulators. (T/F)
95- Opioids are neuromodulators (T/F). Opioids bind to the same recep tors as opium or morphine 
and relieve pain (T/F) 
96- Name the 4 classes of opioids. Opioids relieve pain by blocking t he release of substance P (T/F) 
Study Guide.   Chapter 13.    Spinal Cord.
True or false (T, F)
1- Describe the spinal cord, including location, length, width  and limits.
2- The spinal cord continues to elongate and enlarge until what age ?
3- The spinal cord is shorter than the spinal canal (true or false)
4- The inferior limit of the Spinal cord is: LI or L II (true or false. 
5- Describe the position of the white matter in the spinal cord. Descr ibe the position of the gray 
matter in the spinal cord.
6- What is the cervical enlargement? Importance of the cervi cal enlargement. What is the lumbar 
enlargement? Importance of the lumbar enlargement.
7- Enlargements of the spinal cord occur in the spinal segments that  control the limbs(T,F)
8- The white matter contains bundles of axons with common origin, destin ation and function (T, F). 
The white matter contains mainly Myelinated axons (T,F) 
9- The gray matter contains mainly cell bodies (T,F) 
30


10- What is the conus medullaris? ). In an adult the conus medull aris ends at the level of the LI or LII 
(true or false) 
11- What is the fillum terminalis? Function of the fillum terminal is. It provides longitudinal support 
as a component of a coccygeal ligament (T,F)
12- What is the denticulate ligament? Function of it.
13- What are the horns? The outward projections from the gray matter of  the spinal cord are called 
Horns (T, F). The gray horns of the spinal cord contain mainly cell bod ies (T,F) 
14- What types of neurons contain the anterior, posterior and the la teral gray horn? 
15- The posterior gray horn of the spinal cord contain mainly somati c sensory neurons (T,F ) The 
anterior gray horn contain somatic motor neurons (T, F) The lateral gr ay horn contain neurons 
that control visceral portion of the nervous system (T,F) 
16- A viral disease that destroys the cells of the anterior gray  horn will lead to muscle weakness or 
paralysis (T, F) 
17- What are the nuclei? What are the ganglia? What is a ne rve? What is a tract?
18- The anterior root consists of the axons of motor neurons. (T, F)? What ty pe of information is 
carried by the anterior or ventral root?
19- The dorsal root consists of the axons of sensory neurons. (T, F)? What ty pe of information is 
carried by the dorsal or posterior root?
20- If the dorsal root of the spinal nerve is injured, sensory inpu t would be blocked (T, F) 
21- Content of the dorsal root ganglium? The dorsal root ganglia mainly c ontain cell bodies of 
Sensory neurons (T, F)? 
22- When the dorsal and ventral roots unite, they form the Spinal nerve (T, F)?
23- The spinal nerve forms lateral to the intervertebral foramen  (true or false)
24- How many pairs of spinal nerves are there?
25- What type of information carries the spinal nerve? It is mixed in formation (T, F) ?
26- Number of cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacral and coccige al spinal nerves
27- Name the branches of the spinal nerve.
28- The ventral rami form plexuses (T, F)? The ventral rami inner vate the ventrolateral body surfaces 
and limbs (T, F)? 
31


29- Plexuses are complex, interwoven networks formed by contributi ons from the ventral rami of 
neighboring spinal nerves (T,F) 
30- Structures innervated by the dorsal rami. Dorsal ramus inner vate skin and muscles of the back (T,
F) ?
31- Structures innervated by the communicantes rami. 
32- What are the white and the gray rami communicants?
33- The preganglionic fibers connect a spinal nerve with an autonom ic ganglion (true or false)
34- The post ganglionic fibers that connect an autonomic ganglion i n the thoracic or lumbar regions 
of the spinal cord are gray rami communicants (true or false)
35- Post ganglionic fibers of the Autonomic Nervous System that inne rvate internal organs do not 
rejoin the spinal nerve but form the Autonomic Nerves (T, F)? 
36- What is a plexus? The plexuses are networks of ventral rami only  (true or false)
37- The cervical plexus consists of the ventral rami from C1-C5 (tr ue or false)
38- The brachial plexus consists of ventral rami from C5 to T 1 (T, F)  
39- The lumbar plexus consists of:-----------
40- The sacral plexus consists of:------------
41- How many plexuses are there? Name them 
42- In the thoracic region the ventral rami of the spinal nerves d o not form plexus(T,F)? 
43- The cervical plexus innervates muscles of the neck and shoulder  (T, F) 
44- Phrenic nerve is one of the nerves of the cervical plexus. The p hrenic nerve innervates the 
diaphragma. If a person has a crush injury to the CIII- C IV spina l segments. You would expect 
that he might be unable to breathe on his own. Why? 
45- Name the nerves of the brachial plexus: median, musculocut aneos, radial and ulnar nerve are 
nerves of the Brachiall plexus (T, F) 
46- The femoral nerve belongs to the lumbar plexus (T, F)?
47- The sciatic nerve belongs to the sacral plexus (T, F)?
48- Name the branches of the sciatic nerve. As the sciatic approac hes the knee it divides into two 
branches, fibular and tibial nerves (T,F)? 
32


49- The white matter of the spinal cord contains bundles of axons that share  common origins 
destinations and functions, they are called tracts -------------- -----------------
50- The ascending tracts carry information to the ------------ -------------. The descending tracts carry 
motor commands to the--------------------------
51- What is the gray commisure?. Axons crossing from one side of the spi nal cord to the other within
the gray matter are found here (T,F)? Find the commissures in the il lustrations. 
52- The spinal cord consists of how many segments. What is a spinal segme nt?
53- The cervical portion consists of ------------segments
54- How many segments contain the thoracic, lumbar, sacral and  coccigeal portion?
55- .Each segment is associated with a pair of dorsal root ganglia (t rue or false)
56-  Each segment is designated by a letter and number (true or false)          
57- What is a shingle? In the condition, a virus infects dorsal root g anglia causing a painful rash 
whose distribution corresponds to that of the affected sensory nerves a s seen in their 
dermatomes (T.F)?
58- Name the specialized membranes that protect the spinal cord . Name the membranes that 
protect the brain.  Name the meninges in order.
59- What is the meningitis? Bacterias, viruses can be the cause of t he inflammation of the meninges.
The cerebro spinal fluid flow can be disrupted (T, F)?
60-   Where are found the blood vessels that supply directly the spinal c ord? The piamater is the 
layer that is in direct contact with the spinal cord. (T,F)?
61- The though fibrous, outermost covering of the spinal cord is the duram ater (T,F)?
62- What is the subarachnoid space?. 
63- The subarachnoid space contains CSF. Function of the CSF.
64- The subdural space lies between the duramatter and the arac hnoid matter (T,F)?
65- The epidural space contains connective tissue (adipose and blood vesse ls) (T,F)? The epidural 
space is used to 
66- Functions of the epidural block?. It is commonly used as a method of pain  control during labor 
and delivery. Provides mainly sensory anesthesia. Affects only t he spinal nerves in the immediate
area of the injection. It can be difficult to achieve in the cervic al and mid thoracic regions. (T,F)?
67- The spinal tap is performed at what level?  Cervical, thoracic , lumbar, sacral? Why?
33


68-  The withdrawn of the CSF in performed in the subarachnoid spac e (T, F)?
69-   Every spinal cord segment is connected to a pair of spinal nerve s (true or false)
70- Every spinal nerve is surrounded by a layer of connective tissue na med epineurium (T, F)?. The 
bundle of axons is surrounded by the peri -----------. Every indi vidual axon is surrounded bythe 
endo------------      
71- What is a neural reflex?  . Characteristics of the neural re flex           
72- What is an innate reflex?
73- What is quadriplejia? What is paraplejia?  
74- What is a neuronal pool? Name the neuronal circuit pattern s.
75- What is convergence? What is divergence?. What is reverbera tion?. What is serial processing? 
What is parallel processing?
76- The flexor reflex moves a limb away from a painful stimulus (T,F )?
77- A Babinski reflex is a sign of injury to descending spinal tracts,  it is normal in newborns, it is 
abnormal in adults. It is the flaring of the toes when the sole is stroke d. (T, F)?
78- Identify in the illustrations: anterior and posterior gray com misures, anterior and posterior white
columns, anterior , posterior and lateral gray horn, anterior an d posterior root, dorsal root 
ganglium, spinal nerve, ventral ramus, dorsal ramus and sympat hetic ganglion.
Study Guide.   Chapter14.   Brain and Cranial Nerves.
                                             True or False (T, F)
1. Name the three primary vesicles and the organs that originate f rom each vesicle.
2. The Human Brain contains almost the-------. % of the body s neu ral tissue.
3. The average weight of the Human brain is about------------- --.
4. The Human Brain ranges from --------cc to 2100 cc.
5. There is not correlation between brain size and intelligence.( T rue or False)
6. The largest part of the brain is the--------------------- --------
7. The Cerebrum controls  higher mental functions (T, F)
8. Conscious thoughts, sensations, intellect, intelligence, rationali zation and complex movements al 
originate in the cerebrum.
34


9. The gray matter in the surface of the cerebrum is called: -- ---------------------.
10. The hemispheres of the cerebrum are called ------------- -------------------hemispheres.
11. In the cerebrum, the right and lef cerebral hemisphere are  separated by the ------------
12. Are the fissures deep or shallow grooves?
13. The longitudinal fissure is a groove (deep or shallow?)Sulcus are  deep or shallow grooves?
14. The folds in the surface of the brain increase surface are a(T ,F)
15. The grooves separate the cerebrum into how many lobes.Name th e lobes What is the location of 
each lobe? Where is the insula?
16. Name the sulcus that separate frontal from parietal lobe, fron tal and parietal from temporal lobe, 
parietal from occipital lobe.
17. The 2 hemispheres have different functions but their structu res are alike (T ,F)
18. Each cerebral hemisphere receives sensory information from and se nds motor commands to the 
opposite side of the body (T,F)
19. In the cerebrum myelinated axons form the -----------matter  (white or gray)?
20. Myelinated axons in the cerebrum form tracts of fibers classified  into 3 groups called:
21. In the cerebrum Association fibers connect structures within a sin gle cerebral hemisphere (T,F)
22. Commisural fibers are connecting structures between the hem ispheres (T,F)
23. Projection fibers  connect the cerebral cortex to diencephal ons, brainstem, cerebellum and spinal 
cord (T,F)
24. The Internal capsule is a collection of projection fibers,(T,F )
25. The Corpus Collosum is a collection of commissural fibers (T,F)
26. In the cerebrum, the gray matter is organized into neural cort ex and nuclei (T,F).)
27. The gray matter in the periphery of the cerebrum forms the neural (cerebral) cortex.
28. The gray matter inside the cerebrum forms the nuclei.
29. These nuclei are called basal nuclei. (T,F)
30. The nuclei are clusters of cell bodies (T,F)
31. The basal nuclei are involved in subconscious activities.(T,F)
35


32. The basal nuclei are involved and the coordination of learned m ovements patterns.(T,F)
33. The basal nuclei are involved in the subconscious control of skele tal muscle tone.
34. The basal nuclei are: Caudate nucleus and Lentiform.nucle us. (T,F)
35. The lentiform nucleus are two: Globus pallidus and Putamen ( T,F)
36. What is the location  Function of the primary motor area. 
37. Location  and function of the primary sensory area.
38. Location of the somato sensory association area. Function of it area.
39. Give the location of the Pyramidal cells.
40. Visual Information (it is info. from sight receptors). (T,F) Loc ation of sight receptors.
41. Auditory info (from sound receptors. ( Location of the sound recept ors)
42. Olfactory(from odor receptors, smell) ( Location of them.)
43. Gustatory cortex (from taste receptors) 
44. The visual cortex is located in the Occipital lobe (T, F)
45. Auditory Cortex and olfactory cortex are located in the tempor al lobe (T,F)
46. The gustatory cortex is located in the insula. (T,F)
47. Where is the Broca s area? Function of the Broca s area.
48. Where is the pre frontal cortex?.Function of the prefrontal cort ex.
49. What is the Wernicke s area? Function of the  Wernicke area.
50. What is hemispheric lateralization?
51. The lef hemisphere (in most people) controls : reading , wr iting, math, decision making, speech and 
language (T,F)
52. The right hemisphere is related to sense (touch, smell, sight,  taste , feel and recognition (faces, voice 
inflections)
53. The cerebellum is the second largest part of the brain (T,F)
54. The cerebellum coordinates repetitive body movements.(T,F)
55. The hemispheres of the cerebellum are called: ----------- ----------hemispheres.
36


56. The neural cortex that covers the cerebellum is called        cor tex.
57. In the cerebellum the gray matter is organized into the cere bellar cortex and cerebellar nuclei (T,F)
58. The cerebellum is an autonomic processing center (T,F)
59. The cerebellum adjusts postural mm (muscles) T,F)
60. The cerebellum fine tunes conscious and subconscious movemen ts.(T,F)
61. Name the three parts of the cerebellum.
62. The cerebellar hemispheres are separated by the vermis (T,F)
63. Where are found the Purkinje cells?
64. The Arbor vitae is the highly branched internal white matter of  the cerebellum.(T,F)
65. The arbor vitae relay information to the purkinje cells.(T, F)
66. The superior cerebellar peduncles are tracts that link cere bellum with structures that are 
above( diencephalon, cerebrum)
67. The middle cerebellar peduncles link the cerebellum with the pons.
68. The inferior cerebellar peduncles link the cerebellum w ith the MO and Spinal cord.
69. What is the Ataxia?
70. The diencephalon consists of: thalamus and hypothalamus.
71. The diencephalons is located under the corpus collosum.
72. The third ventricle is the cavity of the diencephalon.
73. The intermediate mass (projection of gray matter ) connects both th alamus.
74. The thalamus relays and processes sensory information.
75. The pineal gland is located in the epithalamus.
76. The pineal gland secretes the hormone melatonin (T,F)
77. The hypothalamus  is related to: -hormone production, -emotions and a utonomic functions.
78. The pituitary gland is the major endocrine gland (T,F)
79. The pituitary gland is connected to the hypothalamus via the infundibulum.
37


80. The hypothalamus and the pituitary gland are responsible f or the integration of the nervous and the 
endocrine system.
81. The hypothalamus secretes ADH and Oxytocin (hormones)
82. The hypothalamus regulates body temperature.(T,F)
83. The                          is the feeding and thirst center. (T,F)
84. The brain stem is located below the thalamus and hypothalam us.
85. The brain stem consist of three organs that are: 1-:mesencepha lon, 2-pons and 3-medulla oblongata.
86. The brain stem processes information between the spinal cord, cer ebrum and cerebellum.(T,F)
87. What are the cerebral peduncles. What is the corpora cuad rigemina.
88. The corpora cuadrigemina consist of:-------------and---- --------------         
89. The mesencephalon processes sight and sound associated reflexes (T/F)
90. The mesencephalon is also called mid brain.(T,F)
The mesencephalon  maintains consciousness.(T,F)
91. The superior colliculi contains nuclei that process visual in fo(T,F)
92.  The inferior colliculi contains nuclei that process auditory i nfo.(T,F)
93. Describe the position of the pons. Describe the location of the m edulla oblongata
94. In The M Oblongata the cardiovascular centers adjust the hea rt rate and blood pressure .The 
respiratory rhytmicity centers set the basic pace for respirat ory movements. (T,F)
95. Name the cavities of the Cerebral hemispheres.
96. The wall that separates the lateral ventricules (1, and 2 )is the septum pellucidum(T,F)
97. The cavity of the diencephalon is the Third ventricule. (T ,F)
98. The 3rd ventricule is located between both thalamus (T,F)
99. The lateral ventricules communicate with the third vent ricle via 
      Interventricular foramen (foramen of Monro).
100. The cavity of the mesencephalon is the mesencephalic aqu educt.(T,F)
101. The mesencephalic aqueduct is also called:-------------an d----------------
102. The cavity that belong to the pons, medulla oblongata and the cer ebellum is the Fourth 
ventricule. ( T,F)
38


103. The roof of the fourth ventricle contains the apertures (1 medi an and 2 lateral) that 
communicate with the subarachnoid space.(T,F) 
104. The fourth ventricle becomes continuous with the central canal  of spinal cord.(T,F)
105. The structures that protect and support the brain are : 1-bon es of the cranium,  2 cranial 
meninges,3- cerebrospinal fluid and the blood brain barrier. (T,  F). 
106. Name the three cranial meninges.
107. The pia mater contains blood vessels and is the innermost lay er.
108. The subarachnoid space contains -------- CSF---------- -- (T,F)   
109. Name the layers of the dura matter .
110. Explain the location of the dural sinuses and what the dural sinuses  contain: ------
111. Name the dural folds.
112. The choroids plexus consists of:------------and---------- ----
113. Function of the choroids plexus. Where is reabsorbed the CSF ? Func tions of the CSF?
114. The arteries that deliver blood to the brain are: carotids and v ertebral aa.(T,F)
115. The jugular veins drain blood from the brain (from the dura l sinuses) (T,F)
116. Function of the blood brain barrier.
117. What is dyslexia?
118. What is hydrocephalus?
119. Name the cranial nerves.Which one is mixed, sensory or motor?
120. Give the general innervation of each cranial nerve.
121. What is the Bell palsy?
122. What is meningitis? What is encephalitis?
123. What is the electroencephalograph?
Study Guide.  Chapter 16.   Autonomic Nervous System. (ANS)
1- The Somatic N. System and the ANS belong to the Efferent Division  of the Nervous System.(T,F)
2- Th SNS controls skeletal muscles (T,F)
39


3- The ANS controls visceral effectors (T,F).
4- The ANS coordinates the systems: ------------------------ ----------------------------------Name them all.
5- The ANS adjusts water, electrolytes,nutrients , dissolved ga ses in body fluids (T,F)
6- What are the preganglionic neurons?
7- Location of the preganglionic neurons.
8-  What are the preganglionic fibers?
9- What are the autonomic ganglia?
10- What are thepostganglionic fibers?
11- Name the two divisions of the ANS.
12- What is the thoracolumbar division of the ANS?
13- General function of the sympathetic division of the ANS relat ed to: mental alertness, metabolic 
rate, digestive and urinary functions, energy reserves, respirator y rate , heart rate, blood 
presssure , activation of sweat glands.
14- General functions of the parasympathetic division.
15- What is the the chain ganglia?
16- What fibers are short in the Sympathetic division?
17- What fibers are long in the sympathetic division?
18- Name the organs innervated by the sympathetic chain gan glia.
19- What are the collateral ganglia?
20- Name the organs inervated by the celiac ganglia.
21- Name the organs inervated by the superior mesenteric gang lia.
22- Name the organos inervated by the inferior mesenteric gan glia.
23- The suprarenal medula is a modified sympathetic ganglion.(T,F)
24- Neurondocrine cells in the suprarenal gland are specialize d neurons that secrete hormones 
chemcal messengers in the blood stream.
25- The neurotransmitters released by the adrenal medula are :        . .and           .
26- Anatomical differences between SNS and ANS
27- Anatomical differences between Sympathetic and Parasympa thetic NS
28-  Where are found the ganglia in both Sympathetic and Parasymp athetic NS?
29- General functions for both Sympathetic and Parasympathetic NS
30-  Sympathetic and Parasympathetic activation
31-  Neurotransmitters in pre and post ganglionic fibers
32- Receptors for both Sympathetic and Parasympathetic NS
33- Autonomic refexes
34- Dual innervation (The Heart)
Study guide.   Chapter 17.    Senses
1. Name the cells of the olfactory epithelium.
40


2. The olfactory receptors are modified neurons (True or False)
3. The receptors only can be stimulated by water and lipid soluble  materials(T,F)
4. The knob of the Olf Receptor is a base for up to 20 cilia that extend  to the surrounding mucosa. 
(T,F)
5. What are odorants?
6. Stem cells differentiate to produce new receptors. (T,F)
7. It is one of the few examples of neuronal replacement in adult hum ans(T,F)
8. The total # of olf receptors decline with age (T,F)
9. Function of the Olfactory glands.
10. What is anosmia?. What is hyposmia?
11. What is tasting?. What is the location of the taste receptors.
12. Name the lingual papillae. Location of the lingual papil lae?.  Function of the filiform papillae?
13.  Name the 4 primary tests sensations.
14. The --------------- papillae form a V near the posterio r margin of the tongue?
15. Taste receptors are distributed in larynx.,tongue an p harynx (T,F)
16. The taste buds are innervated by ------------------and --------------cranial nerves.
17. The anterior 2/3 of tongue is innervated by  the ---------- ---cranial nerve.(Sensory)
18. The post 1/3 of the tongue is innervated by the ------------- -cranial n.(Sensory)
19. Motor inf to the tongue is provided by the .----------cranial nerve.
20. What is the umami?
21. Our taste abilities change with age (t or F). 
22. The palpebrae are the eyelids (T,F). Function of the palpe brae.?
23. What are the canthus?
24. Where are the tarsal glands?
25. What is a Meibomian gland and. What is a chalazion?
26. Give the location of the lacrimal gland.? Function of the lacr imal gland.
41


27. What is the  lacrimal apparatus. Function of the tears.
28. What is the lacrimal caruncle . Give its function.
29. What is the conjunctiva?
30. What is the cornea?
31. What is the iris?
32. What is the fornix?
33. What is the pupil?
34. Name and function of the pupillary mm.
35. Name the muscles that move the eyes
36. The muscles that move the eyes are attached to the sclera.(T,,F)
37. Name the cranial nerves that innervate the muscles that move  the eye.
38. The nerves: oculomotor, trochlear and abducens are Motor.(t,F)
39. The oculomotor nerve innervates the muscles:superior,inferior a nd medial rectus and the 
inferior oblique m.(T,F)
40. The trochlear nerve innervates the superior oblique m.(T,F)
41. The abducens nerve innervates the lateral rectus m.(T,F )
42. Function of the fibrous tunic.
43. Function of the vascular tunic.
44. The fibrous tunic consists of:---------------------------- ---------
45. The vascular tunic consists of:------------------------ ----------
46. The neural tunic consists of:-------------------------- -----------
47. Function of the rods. Function of the cons.
48. Function of the bipolar cells.
49. Function of the macula lutea and the fovea centralis.
50. What is the optic disk
51. Give the function of the lens.
42


52. To focus the light the lens changes the shape.  (T,F)
53. The shape of the lens is controlled by the ciliary mm (T,F)
54. Where are the anterior and posterior cavities?
55. Function of the vitreous humor?. Function of the aqueous humor.
56. Where is produced the aqueous humor?. Function of the canal of schl em,
57. What is the focal point ?  What is the focal distance.?
58. Factors that determine the focal distance.
59. The closer the object is to the lens the ---------the focal dis tance.
60. The rounder the lens the more refraction occurs (T,F)
61. What is refraction?
62. What is accommodation?
63. What is cataract?
64. What is conjunctivitis?
65. Emmetropia is considered the normal vision (T,F)
66. What is Myopia?
67. What is hyperopia?
68. What is presbyopia?
69. What is 20/ 20 vision?
70. What is the pinna?. Function of the pinna or auricle.
71. Function of the external auditory canal.
72. Location and function of the ceruminous glands.
73. Function of the tympanic membrane.
74. Function of the pharyngotympanic tube.
75. What is the otitis media?
76. Name and function of the ossicles of the middle ear.
43


77. The ossicles connect the tympanic membrane to the oval window (T,  F).
78. The 3 parts of the inner ear are:---------, ---------- - and ------------.
79. Where are located the sensory receptors of the semicircular ca nals.
80. The hair cells of the utricule and saccule are in the---- ---------
81. Where are registered the sensations of gravity and linear a ccelerations.
82. Where are the receptors for hearing and equilibrium?
83. Location and function of the perilymph and endolymph.
84. Function of the utricule and sacule.
85. Function of the oval window. Function of the round window.
86. Name the 3 chambers of the cochlea.
87. Location of the organ of Corti.
88. Function of the organ of Corti.
44


