UNIT 1: B IOLOGY : THE SCIENCE  OF LIFE   
Module 1: Introduction to Biology
  Biotic (living) 
oOrganized in hierarchical pattern; uses energy and raw materi al to survive; senses and responds to 
environment to maintain homeostasis; grows, develops, and reproduces; be  of population that evolves.
 Bacteria (yogurt), cells, matter (if makeup was ever alive)
  Abiotic (nonliving)
oDoes not meet all qualifications for biotic.
 Water, DNA, protein, Viruses
  Identify the levels of biological organization from atom to biome .
oHierarchical System
 Cell 
 Fundamental and smallest unit of life
 Prokaryotes Cell - small & simple without defined compartmen ts.
 Eukaryotes Cell - includes membrane bound organelles (compartments ins ide that contain specific 
groups of macromolecules to carry out specific functions [Exp. Nuc leus houses DNA])
 Micro-organisms   single celled life forms (also unicellular) such as bacteria and protists
 Tissue
 Formed by cells working together to perform same detailed function.
 Organs
 Collections of tissues that work together to perform common general func tions.
 Also present in plants
 Organ System
 Organized functionally related organs.
 Organisms
 Individual living entities that survive and reproduce as a unit.


UNIT 2: B ASIC  CHEMISTRY  AND BIOLOGICAL  MACROMOLECULES    
Module 3: Atoms and Chemical Bonding
 Atom
oSmallest unit of matter
oMade up of subatomic particles:
 Protons
 Positive electrical charge (+ 1)
 Included in center of nucleus (always positively charged)
 One atomic mass unit (amu)
 Neutrons
 Electrically neutral (+/- 0)
 Included in center of nucleus.
 One atomic mass unit (amu)
 Electrons
 Negative electrical charged (- 1)
 Found outside of nucleus orbiting it (shells)
 Nearly no atomic mass 
oShells
 Filled with electrons from closest to furthest from nucleus.
 First shell always has two electrons.
 Second and third shells have room for eight electrons each.
oIon
 When Atom has excess of protons or electrons, it is positive or  negatively charged.
 Cations (+) or Anions (-)
oNeutral
 When total number of protons and electrons are equal
 Atomic Mass:
oSum of Protons and Neutrons (electrons have no mass)
 Chemical Bonds
oAttractions that hold two or more atoms together (molecules)
oAtoms form bonds in attempt to fill 2nd and 3rd shells to achieve stability.
oTypes of Bonds
 Covalent   
 Strongest
 Occur between atoms in same molecule.
 Electron pairs shared .
 Exp.: Hydrogen   1 electron (shell 1) / Carbon   4 electrons (shell 2)
4 Hydrogens share each electron w/ 1 Carbon
Each H gets 2 electrons (shell 1) / Carbon gets 8 electrons (she ll 2)
 Ionic   
 Moderately strong
 Occur between charged atoms (ions)
 Electron transfer  from one atom to another resulting in moderately strong electrostatic a ttractions 
between oppositely charged ions.
 Exp.:  Chlorine   7 electrons (shell 3) / Sodium   1 electron (shell  3)
Sodium -1 electron (shell 2 now outermost) / Chlorine +1 electron (s hell 3 full)


 Hydrogen Bond
 Weakest
 Occurs between atoms in different molecules or parts of molecul es.
 Weak electrostatic attraction between areas of molecules with opposite partial charge
 Occurs between electronegative  atoms such as when covalent bonds form.
  2 H2O covalent bonds being bonded together.
  Water, DNA, proteins, etc.
 Special Properties of Water:
oSolution   
 Mixture of two or more substances which are evenly distributed (sal t in water)
 Solvent   
 Component of the solution in the greatest quantity
 Exp. Adding sugar to saltwater solution, water is solvent.
 Solute   
 Component(s) present in lower quantities.
 Exp. Adding sugar to saltwater solution, sugar and salt are solute s.
 Dissolves in solvent
 Solutions with water as solvent are called aqueous solutions  (exp. inside of our cells)
oHydrophilic   
 Substances that will dissolve in water.
 Molecules bonded by ionic bonds split into positive and negative ions and diss olve.
 Hydrophobic   
 Nonpolar Molecules that do not dissolve in water (oils, fats, etc.)
oCohesion   
 Attraction of molecules to each other to 
 Causes Surface Tension  to develop.
 Ability of the surface of water to resist being ruptured and distr ibuted.
 Adhesion   
 Attraction between water molecules and other molecules (water  climbing up a straw)
 Allows water to flow up tubes within plants.
oWater Temperature
 Water temperature tends to be stable and heats as a full unit  vs one atom at a time and bonds must be 
broken to warm the water.
 Freezing - molecules join in crystal structure releasing heat to surrounding environment.
oWater Density
 Molecules are bound to neighbors and unable to move closer, thus expanding the s tructure but making it 
less dense than liquid water.


 Molecule   
oChemical structure made of at least two atoms.
 Macromolecules   
oBiologically important molecules that are polymers 
oPolymers - combination of simple macromolecules or monomers
oExp. Genetic molecule deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
 Organic Molecules   
oAny molecule containing a carbon-Hydrogen Bond (C-H)
oAtoms within are connected by covalent bonds.
oModular smaller organic molecules (monomers ) that can be linked to form larger organic molecules 
(polymers )
oStore a lot of chemical potential energy.
oFour Groups
 Carbohydrates   
 Polymers made up sugars  (monomers)
 Energy storage, cellular communication, and structural support
 Simple Carbs   :
  Sugars - one or two sugar monomers (monosaccharide or disaccharide)
 Complex Carbs   :
  More than two sugar monomers covalently bonded together (polysaccharide)
 Glucose      used by plants and animals to store energy, cells break apart to r elease / use energy.
 Lipids   
 Energy storage and maintain boundary between living organism and environment.
 Fats & oils (AKA Triglycerides )
  Glycerol & fatty acids
  Store energy (fat twice as much as carbs)
 Phospholipids   
 Fatty acids & phosphate
  Made of hydrophilic glycerol heads and hydrophobic fatty acid tails
  Provide cell membrane structure and protective barrier for cel ls or separating compartments.
 Steroids   
  Carbon ring molecules
  Cell membrane structure and regular metabolic and energy processe s
  Includes cholesterol - synthesized by liver to build steroids secr eted by sex organs and precursor to 
vitamins D and K as well as bile salts.
 Waxes   
  Esters of fatty acids
  Form protective layers on plants and animals to repel water.
 Proteins   
 Macromolecules (Polymers) made up of amino acids (monomers)
  Amino Acids   building blocks of a protein, attached end to end via covalent bonds which allow for
different protein shapes.
 Protein Folding
  Amino acids driven to core because they are repelled by water
 Carry out most of necessary functions of life.
 Work as enzymes  which speed up and control chemical reactions in cells.
  Enzymes   catalysts, make reactions go faster and are not alte red by the reaction
 Inorganic Molecules
oRelatively stable, simple, and store little chemical potent ial energy
 Exp. Water, oxygen, carbon dioxide, ionic salts


 Nucleic Acid   
oMacromolecules (Polymers) to store genetic info and synthesize  proteins.
oConsists of a chain of nucleotides  that can be linked to build different nucleic acids.
 Nucleotides   :
 Molecules that make up units of nucleic acids (monomers)
 Creates the helix structure (double stranded) which twist around and a re connected by two 
strings of nucleotides. 
 Built from phosphate & sugar (outside) and a nitrogenous base (inside)
 Held together by hydrogen bond.
 Nitrogenous Base   :
 DNA   Adenine (A), Guanine (G), Cytosine (C), Thymine (T)
 RNA   Adenine (A), Guanine (G), Cytosine (C), Uracil (U)
 Pairing rules (A-T and G-C)
 ATP   :
 Nucleotide with Adenine Nitrogenous Base, a sugar, and 3 phosphate creates A TP.
 A molecule formed that contains large amount of very readily accessible  energy.
(Note: only 1 phosphate is part of RNA and DNA)
oTypes of Nucleic Acids
 Ribonucleic Acid    (RNA)
 Transmits the information from DNA so that it can be used to produce proteins.
 Involved in protein synthesis.
 Leaves the nucleus. 
 Single stranded.
 C, U, A, G
 Deoxyribonucleic Acid    (DNA)
 Stores and transmits inherited genetic information.
 Nucleotides are the building blocks (monomers) of DNA.
 Contains coded directions for making proteins.
 Stores genetic information.
 Remains in nucleus.
 Double stranded.
 C, T, A, G
 Single molecule of DNA is chromosome.
 DNA Replication
  Synthesis of new DNA double helix, each strand is used as a templa te stand to build a new 
DNA strand.
oDNA will then complement those bases.
  Catalyzed by DNA Polymerase .
oHelix untwists and strands to separate down the middle, pairing one side  of separated 
helix with a new complementary base.
  Is semiconservative .
oHalf of the original molecule (the template strand ) is conserved by the new molecule.
  During S Phase
  Critical that copy is exact, changes can lead to issues (mutati ons)


 Cell Theory   
oAll living things are composed of one or more cells.
oAll new cells are created by pre-existing cells dividing.
oThe cell is the most basic unit of structure and function in all l iving organisms.
 Cells   
oTypes of Cells:
 Prokaryotes   
 Simple cells that make single celled organisms (i.e., bacte ria)
 DNA is circular, looping around itself like rubber band.
 Nucleoid Region
  Area where DNA is stored.
  P-Cells do NOT contain a Nucleus. 
 Eukaryotes      
 Larger, more complex cells most often creating multicellular organisms (plants, animals, fungi)
 DNA is linear and does NOT loop but has ends.
 Can also be single celled organisms.
 Contains Organelles  & Nucleus.
oMUST HA VE:
 DNA
 Instructions for building cells machinery
 Membrane    
 Acts as boundary to control what comes in or out.
 Cytoplasm    
 Fluid substance inside of the cell.
 Space where chemical reactions than enable life take place.
 Contains the Cytoskeleton
 Cytoskeleton   
 Network of filaments that support and frame the cell to move things  around the cytoplasm.
 Ribosomes   
 Structures that facilitate building of proteins
oCAN HA VE:
 Cell Walls   
 Only in plants
 Layer outside of membrane that provides rigid structural support and shapes cell.
 Mostly in prokaryote cells but can be in eukaryote cells.
 Made of cellulose   complex carb that is durable.
 Cilia   
 External appendages on some cells 
 Can be present in both P & E Cells
 Flagella   
 Long extensions from the surface of the cell that can move back and fort h to help cells move.
 Can be present in both P & E Cells
 i.e., the tail on a sperm cell allowing it to swim (E-Cell).


 Organelles   
oSpecialized structures for carrying out functions similar to a f actory. 
oHave own membrane to enclose self from rest of the cell.
oInclude:
 Nucleus   
 a specialized compartment organelle for holding DNA surrounded by a double l ayered 
membrane, the Nuclear Envelope .
 Mitochondria   
 Converts sugar to ATP (usable energy)
 Chloroplast    
 Plant specific 
 Captures energy from sun and uses to build sugar molecules (Photosynthesis )
 Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER)    
 series of sacs and tubes where proteins and cellular components are  assembled.
 Rough ER   
  Has ribosomes embedded to give beheaded appearance.
  Assist ribosomes in protein production.
 Smooth ER   
  Various functions, most often site of synthesis for lipids 
  NO ribosomes.
 Golgi Apparatus   
 Packaging and shipping center of cell
 Where proteins, built by ER, are delivered to parts of the cell ( or body in multicellular).
 Often packages in membrane-bound sacs (Vesicles  & Vacuoles ) that function in storage and 
transportation.
 Vesicles   
  Specialized for transport and some other functions.
  Their membranes can fuse with cell membrane or membranes of E R and Golgi apparatus 
to empty contents out of cell or into organelles.
  Lysosomes    
ospecialized vesicles only in animals containing digestive enzymes for recycling of cells
or destruction of invaders.
 Vacuoles   
  For storage, their membranes do not fuse with others.
  In plants, can have central vacuole where water is stored for  use.
 Chlorophyll   
 Pigments embedded in the membrane.
 Gives plants their green color.
 Used to capture the sun s energy and use it to build sugar/glucose molecules.


 Cell Membranes   :
oFunctions as a boundary to control what enters and exits the cell, as sisting homeostasis.
oSome molecules require proteins to transport them across the me mbrane, helping control cell security.
 Phospholipid Bilayer    
 Creates the Membrane.
 Contains a variety of proteins and other compounds.
 Causes membrane to be semipermeable.
 Core is hydrophobic, blocking diffusion of hydrophilic ions and polar molecules.
 Also have carbs acting as signaling molecules or markers to cell i nteract with environment.
 Phospholipids   
 Fluid in which components in the membrane float.
 Both hydrophilic (head) and Hydrophobic (tail)
 Arrange in pattern that allows the tail to avoid water, thus wor king as boundary for cell.
 Allow cell to change shape, by adding or removing phospholipids (growth and movement).
 Selectively Permeable   
  Can control to extend what substances pass through membrane.
 Osmosis   
 Diffusion of water across the cell membrane.
 Water will flow into or out of cells if they are exposed to environments with different 
concentrations.
oMovement Methods:
 Simple Diffusion   
 Molecules spontaneously moving from areas of high concentration to areas of low 
concentration due to random movement.
  i.e., a drop of ink in water.
 Allows molecules to diffuse out of the cell down their concen tration gradient.
  i.e., small molecules, polar molecules, and nonpolar molecules.
 Facilitated Diffusion   
 Channels or pores that allow specific molecules to pass through the  membrane.
  For large polar molecules and charged molecules.
 Can be always open or gated channels that open and close in response to cell needs.
  Doesn t require added energy from cell due to movement down concentration gradients.
 Active Transport   
 How molecules move against their concentration gradient.
 Requires the cell to do work (expend energy) with the source of the energy b eing ATP.
 Endocytosis   
 Material is engulfed within an enfolding of the membrane and brought inside with cytoplasmic 
vesicle.
  Particle encounters cell surface, producing a dimple or pit in membrane.  Pit will then 
deepen and finally pinch off to form a vesicle in the cytoplasm of the  cell.
  i.e., immune cells protect animals by engulfing foreign objects suc h as bacteria
 Exocytosis   
 Reverse of Endocytosis
 Internal vesicle fuses with the membrane and releases contents to the outside.
  i.e., nerve cells release signal molecules en masse.


UNIT 4: M ETABOLISM  (M ODULE  10-11)   
Module 10: Photosynthesis
 Photosynthesis   :
oMetabolic pathway that uses light energy to build Carbs from C O2.
 CO2 + H2O + Light = Sugar + O2
 Oxygen given off as by-product from splitting water.
oDoes this to store energy in glucose molecules for later use (c hemical potential energy )
oOccurs in the chloroplast in two steps.
 Step 1: Light Dependent
 Absorb light energy to use in breaking water apart, exciting one of water  s electrons.
  Electron used to produce ATP and NADPH
 NADPH   
  Moves electron from one reaction to another.
oElectron that starts in water moved to where it will split the  water to produce O2.
oLight + H2O = ATP + NADPH + O2
 Step 2: Light Independent
 Calvin Cycle    (Calvin-Benson Cycle)
  The light independent reaction that takes place after energy has been captured from 
sunlight.
oPlant uses ATP energy and the NADPH electron to build sugar and CO2.
oATP + NADPH + CO2 = Sugar
 Adenosine Triphosphate   ATP   
oThe major energy carrier for cells, held in phosphate group.
o3 phosphate groups, when broken releases energy for cell to perform wor k (building glucose in Calvin 
Cycle)
oLinks Calvin Cycle and Light Dependent Reaction
 Calvin Cycle makes ATP become ADP   .   
 From remaining phosphate group
 Doesn t contain as much energy as before but can return to Light Dependent R eaction to go 
through Phosphorylation.
  Third phosphate group is added, and ATP rebuilt by light energy.
 NADPH   
oHold energy by carrying excited electron.
oLinks Calvin Cycle and Light Dependent Reaction
 Becomes NADP+
 Doesn t contain as much energy as before.
 FADH2   
oElectron carrier molecule produced in the Krebs Cycle of aerobic cellular respiration.
oTransferred to the electron transport chain where electrons are used to generate ATP.


 Cellular Respiration   
oEnergy released from glucose is put into (ATP)
 Requires ADP +P and Sugar, 
 Produces CO2 and Water
oIs photosynthesis running in reverse.
oAerobic Process      requires oxygen to perform.
oStep 1: Glycolysis
 Process of breaking down glucose into simple molecules, releasing some of the energy stored in the
glucose bonds.
 Produces NADH, ATP, and Pyruvate
 Pyruvate   
  Three carbon molecules broken down from glucose.
  Converted into Acetyl coA  for next step.
oTwo carbon molecules.
 Can lead to fermentation.
  Process in that does not require oxygen (Anaerobic ) in order to produce small amount of 
ATP.
  Can produce lactic acid, ethanol, others.
oStep 2: Citric Acid Cycle  (also Krebs Cycle )
 Occurs in inner space of Mitochondria.
 Acetyl coA    broken down further to release energy and CO2.
  Energy release is used to build ATP, NADH, and FADH2
oStep 3: Electron Transport Chain
 NADH and FADH2 are transported through the membrane inside to mitochondri on and used to 
build more ATP.
 Uses oxygen to accept electrons and produces water.
 Converts them back into NAD+ and FADH where they can be used again in g lycolysis and 
Krebs Cycle.
 Main source of ATP from Cellular respiration.


UNIT 5: C ELL DIVISION    
Module 12: The Cell Cycle
 Cell Cycle   
oLife of a Cell, 5 stages that it goes through during lifetime.
 Interphase      activity in the first three stages of the cycle
 Stage 1: G1 (First Gap)
  Actively growing and producing enzymes and other components needed for later stages.
 Stage 2: Synthesis (S Phase)
  DNA Replication - duplicate copies (2) of the chromosomes is synt hesized (built) by using 
replication enzymes to copy the DNA.
 Stage 3: G2 (Second Gap)
  Cells actively growing again and producing materials needed for later s tages.
  Checks DNA for errors.
 Stage 4: Mitosis (M Phase)
  The nucleus is split into two separate but identical nuclei (cell division).
 Stage 5: Cytokinesis
  Separates the 2 nuclei into two new daughter cells.
oCycle is completed and the two identical cells restart at G1 .
 If conditions are not good, cell will stop cycle until conditions change.
oMutations   
 Break the checkpoints during Interphase  that stop a cell from dividing.
 Errors in the DNA that can result from genetic predispositi on or environmental factors.
 Mutagens   
 Chemicals in the environment that produce mutations.
  i.e., cigarettes contain mutagens that can alter DNA and dis rupt proper regulation of the 
cycle.
 Increased and prolonged exposure lead to development of cancer.
  Cancer   result of numerous mutations in multiple genes involved in r egulating cycle.


 Chromosomes   
oCoiled form of the DNA-Protein complex
 E Cells   located in Nucleus
 P Cells   located in cytoplasm
 Made up of DNA and proteins called Histones.
 Histones   
 Proteins that can move closer or further apart to help chromosomes contract into chromatin
during cell division or decondense after cell division.
oDNA loosely coiled around during S Phase  for ease of access.
oDNA tightly compacts when ready to move.
 Centromere   
 Point where duplicated chromosomes of S Phase  remain attached.
 Helps sorting process for eventual division.
 Chromatids   
 Each copy of the chromosome, which are attached at the centromere (sist er chromatids) to 
form a chromosome.
 Diploid   
 Status of having one copy of each chromosome from each parent.
 The two copies combined are Homologous Chromosomes .
  Similar in length, gene position, and centromere location, but NOT sister chromatids.
  Alleles   
oDifferent specific versions of genes that may appear alike (hair , blood type, etc.)
oHair Gene > wavy allele from parent 1 vs. straight allele fr om parent 2.
 Haploid   
 Cells that only have one copy of each chromosome.
 Can have sister chromatids, but NOT homologous chromosomes.


 Mitosis   
oCell division used to increase cell numbers when we grow or need d amaged cells replaced.
 Produces 2 identical cells at the end.
 Diploid    cell will produce Diploid  cell (duplicates)
 Must have all necessary proteins prior to start.
oSomatic Cells   
 All non-reproductive cells in an organism.
 i.e., tissue cells, nerve cells, blood cells.
 Most of the cells in multicellular organisms.
 Go through mitosis  when dividing.
oCan be used to reproduce asexually in single-celled organisms.
oP.M.A.T.    (Process)
 Prophase (P)
 Chromosomes condense.
 Nuclear membrane begins to disintegrate, allowing cellular components to act upon 
chromosomes.
 Metaphase (M)
 Chromosomes are moved to center of cell.
 Centromeres of each chromosomes pushed to middle to form a line of c hromosomes.
 Anaphase (A)
 Sister Chromatids are separated and moved to opposite sides of cell.
 Chromatids become individual chromosomes and move to opposite poles
 Telophase (T)
 New nuclear membranes are formed around clusters of chromosomes on each side of the cell, 
creating separate but identical nuclei.
 Cytokinesis
 Daughter cells form


 Meiosis   
oCell division that prepares organisms for sexual reproduction.
 Diploid    cell will produce a Haploid  cell (produces half the number of chromosomes)
 Haploid   could then undergo fertilization to receive the full Diploid  number of chromosomes.
oProduces gametes .
 Sperm and egg cells in animals
 When two combine, unique new cell is produced and goes through process of mi tosis to grow.
oProcess:
 Meiosis I   
 Numbers of chromosomes divided in half, because Homologous separated.
    to 1 daughter cell /   to the other daughter cell.
  Ending results in connected chromatid via the centromere still.
 Prophase I    (P)
  Chromosomes condense and membrane breaks down.
  Homologous chromosomes pair up and cross over occurs.
oIncreases genetic diversity, as new combinations of alleles form.
 Metaphase I    (M)
  Homologous pairs line up on metaphase plate, unlike mitosis.
 Anaphase I    (A)
  Homologous pairs are pulled apart and move toward opposite polls of cell.
 Telophase I    (T)
  Cytokinesis occurs and two new daughter cells form.
oTwo haploid daughter cells because homologous pairs of chromosomes separated.
 Meiosis II   
 Begins with two haploid cells, each containing too much DNA.
 Like Meiosis I , however, there are half as many chromosomes.
  Sister cells are separated from each other.
 Produces 4 unique haploid cells at the end.
 Prophase II    (P)
 Metaphase II    (M)
 Anaphase II    (A)
 Telophase II    (T)
 Crossing Over   
oAlternative to reorganize genes.
oProcess swaps gene positions on Homologous Chromosomes, resulting in new combination of genes on
each chromosome.
oOccurs during Prophase I


 Gene   
oRegion of a Chromosome that has specific function.
oUsually, one contains instructions for building one protein.
 Proteins produced by living organisms will determine traits, their  Phenotype .
 Phenotype   
 Manifestation of the genes in an organism
 Physical or physiological characteristics present.
  i.e., protein enzymes in plants build pigment resulting in flowe r color.
 What it looks like or what it is (purple flowers, lactose intol erance, sickle cell anemia).
 Genotype   
 The genetic information that produces the traits in phenotype .
 The Alleles  present.
  i.e., plant genotype  will produce proteins that lead to a pigment of a certain color.
 Usually assigned upper case and lower-case letters
  i.e., plants genotype is BB or bb.
 Why it looks like or has what it does (Alleles for what flowers , Alleles for lactose intolerance)
oGene Pool   
 All the genes and alleles present in a population.
oDiploid cells have 2 copies of each chromosome and each gene.
 One set from mother (egg) one set from father (sperm).
 Can have the same alleles of a gene or different.
 Homozygous   
  Cells that have the same alleles.
oi.e., genotype is bb.
 Heterozygous   
  Cells that have different alleles.
oi.e., genotype is bB.
oPunnett Square   
 Uses to determine probability of a genotype in offspring.
 Phenotype can be determined by the looking at the genotype dominant  and recessive  traits.
Alleles:
(Trait)B
(Purple)b
(White)
B
(Purple)BB
(Purple)Bb
(Purple)
b
(White)Bb
(Purple)bb
(white)
 75% of offspring will have purple phenotype and 25% will have white.
oLaw of Segregation   
 Two Alleles for each gene separate from each other when game tes form.
 Results in each gamete containing one allele of each gene.
oTraits
 A specific characteristic of an individual.
 Recessive   
 A trait that is masked by the Dominant trait (Bb ) and is only expressed in the homozygous 
condition (bb).


 Dominant   
 A trait that is expressed (manifested as a phenotype) even when onl y one copy of the alleles 
encoding the trait is present in the genotype (B b).
  Does not mean it is more likely to be passed to offspring, is st ill only distributed to half of 
the gametes.
  When individuals have one Dominant and one Recessive Allele, Dominant dic tates 
phenotype.
  Exceptions can occur if mutated dominant allele codes enzyme improperly , resulting in 
Recessive trait being manifested as the phenotype.
  Are NOT more favored from an evolutionary point of view.
oMonohybrid Cross   
 Cross between two organisms, each of which is heterozygous for the t rait.
 Results in two heterozygous and two homozygous offspring.
oDihybrid Cross   
 Cross between two organisms, each of which is heterozygous for two distinct traits.
 Law of Independent Assortment   
 Each pair of Alleles segregates separately of any other pair of alleles when gametes are formed.
Alleles: RY Ry rY ry
RY RY RRYy RrYY RrYy
Ry RRYy RRyy RrYy Rryy
rY RrYY RrYy rrYY rrYy
ry RrYy Rryy rrYy rryy
oIncomplete Dominance   
 Inheritance where one allele for a specific trait is not compl etely expressed over the other allele in 
the heterozygote.
 Results in third phenotype, where the expressed physical trait is a c ombination of the 
phenotypes of both alleles.
  i.e., red flower and white flower offspring get pink flowers.
oCo-Dominant   
 Both phenotypes are expressed.
 i.e., red flower and white flower offspring get red and white spotte d flowers.
oPolygenic Inheritance   
 One phenotype is controlled by two or more genes.
 Usually indicated by along the continuum.
 i.e., human height, skin color, eye color, and weight are determined by multiple genes.
 Most visual traits are polygenic.
oEnvironment Factors
 Many traits can be influenced by the environment conditions surrounding them.
 i.e., flower color in acidic soil vs. alkaline soil.
 i.e., blood cell count can vary depending on physical fitness, altitude, medical history.


oSex-Linked   
 Traits associated to alleles located on sex chromosomes.
 Disorders
  i.e., hemophilia, color blindness (red/green)
  Most linked to X Chromosome.
 Sex Chromosomes   
 1 of the 23 chromosomes in Diploids.
  X and Y (Male XY / Female XX)
 Autosomal   
 Chromosomes that are not sex determining.
  22 of the 23 chromosomes in Diploids.
 Disorders
  Progeria, Cystic Fibrosis, Tay-Sachs Disease, Huntington s Dis ease.
oKaryotype   
 Picture of the chromosomes of a cell during mitosis
oDisorders
 Nondisjunction
 Chromosomes not separating properly during anaphase.
 Can result in extra or missing Chromosomes being created.
  Down Syndrome (3 copies of chromosome 21)
  Klinefelter Syndrome (Two copies of X and one Y)
  Turner Syndrome (One X only)
  Edward s Syndrome (3 copies of chromosome 18)
  Patau Syndrome (3 copies of chromosome 13)
 Can occur in Meiosis I or II.
oBRCA Gene   
 Code for proteins involved in detecting and repairing double strand breaks in DN A molecules.
 Defects in BRCA result in increased chances of DNA errors.
 Very important in stopping development of cancer.
 Works as a tumor suppressor gene.


 Gene Expression
oDNA information organized into genes which contain instructions for making proteins.
oDNA > RNA > Protein
 Transcription
 DNA is transcribed and encoded to RNA (specifically mRNA or Messenger RNA) with 
information to be taken to protein synthesizing regions of cell.
  Uses same complementation and polymerase as DNA but uses ba ses found in RNA.
 Translation
 Synthesis of polypeptide (the molecules than join to form proteins) f rom the information in the 
RNA sequence.
oProteins are synthesized by ribosomes, using mRNA as a template.
 Codons    (Triplets)
 Every three bases encoded for a single amino acid.
  Most organisms use same amino acids, meaning genes can be transferr ed to and expressed 
in cells of another organism.
  Only 20 amino acids used by living organisms.
 Transfer RNA (tRNA)   
 RNA directly involved in protein synthesis that transports amino acids to ribosomes to be 
incorporated into emerging protein.
 Contains bases that can pair with a particular codon in mRNA.
  Binds with mRNA via base pairing and brings the correct amino aci ds to the growind 
polypeptide chain.
 Each carries specific amino acid.
 Ribosomal RNA (rRNA)   
 Component of a ribosome, which assists with process of translating the instructions for making
proteins that are present in mRNA.
oSummary
 mRNA      Encodes Protein.
 tRNA      Brings amino acids to mRNA.
 rRNA      a component of the ribosome


 Evolution   
oHow and why genetic changes occur in populations or higher-level groups ove r generations.
 Macroevolution   
 Change in a biological lineage, including the origin or extinction of s pecies.
  Biological lineages - species and higher-level taxonomic groups
  Biodiversity - features and numbers of species.
  Occur over many generations, too slow to observe directly in most cas es.
 Speciation Event   
  An existing species splits or branches into two or more new species that evolve 
independently of each other.
  Formation of new species.
 Clade   
  A group that includes all the species that came from a branch point.
 Linnean Classifications
  Species: Domestic Cat
  Genus: Cats
  Family: Felids
  Order: Carnivores
  Class: Mammals
  Phylum: Chordates
  Kingdom: Animals
 Homologous Features   
  Shared feats. / traits that were inherited from the same s ource and reflect common ancestry.
  Species that are closely or distantly related can share many or few.
oNot all similarities between species are homologous, only if inheri ted from common 
source.
 Phylogenetic Trees (Phylogeny)   
  Tree diagram that represents a hypothesis as to how a biological  lineage may have 
branched and formed clades over time.
oAre subject to change as more data is gathered and analysis technique s improve.
 Microevolution   
 Occurs when the type or frequency of alleles and genotypes in a population change over one to 
many generations.
  Changes for a single population .
oPopulation    - All the individuals of the same species  occupying the same area that are 
likely to breed.
 Genes can be exchanged between different populations of the same species  on 
occasion.
 Species   
- A group of organisms whose members can and will breed with each other.
- Populations are a subset of species and do not include every member of the 
species, just a group in the same area. 
  Gene Pool - genetic makeup of the population.
  One to many generations, may be observed directly in short-lived species.
 Main process is natural selection .
  Nature impacts the evolution of a population.
  Environmental factors favor the reproduction of organisms with so me traits.
 Fitness   
  A measure of reproductive success in organisms.


 Adaptation   
 The fit between organisms and their natural environment.
  Ability to camouflage, tolerate temperature, etc.
  Are inherited characteristics that enable an organism s success ful reproduction in a given 
environment.
oBecome common as result of past and ongoing natural selection .
oCan be physical, chemical, or behavioral.
oSexual Selection   
 Traits that attract more mates or allow victory in competition over mates.
 Natural selection    arising through preference by one sex for certain characteristics 
in individuals.
oArtificial Selection    (Selective Breeding)
 Human trait selection to domesticate plants and animals to suit needs.
oMutations can be adaptive traits that change a population.
oGene Flow   
 Result of fertile members of a species moving into or out of a popul ation.
oGene Drift   
 Change in a gene pool because of random chance.
 Alleles being eliminated from a population.
 A natural disaster eliminating a chunk of a population.
 Not Evolution
 Individual changes including features acquired through development, learning, i njury, etc.
 Single life span changes.


 Ecology   
oStudy of how organisms relate to one another and their environment.
 Population   
 All the same individuals of a species that occupy same area and breed.
 Community   
 All the populations  (living organisms) within an area interacting with each other.
  i.e., a forest community, a desert community, etc.
 Ecosystem   
 Includes the community  as well as the non-living factors in an area such as chemicals in t he 
soil, rainfall, etc.
 Biosphere   
 All the areas on, within, or around Earth that are capable of supporting life.
 Interspecific Interaction   
oAn effect of one population on another in a community.
oAny interaction between members of different species.
 Symbiosis   
 Direct community interaction between pairs of species that ar e intimately and physically 
connected.
 Species 1 (symbiont) living in or on the body of Species 2 (host)
 Mutualism   
 Species 1 & 2 benefit from each other s presence (win-win)
  May involve trading materials, services, or both.
 Can be Symbiosis .
 Predation   
 Species 1 (Predator) benefits / Species 2 (prey) is harmed.
 Also includes herbivory  species (plant eating).
 Competition   
 Species 1 & 2 are both are harmed by the presence of each other (l ose-lose)
  May involve two species interfering directly (fighting) or using the  same limited resource.
 Parasitism   
 Parasite benefits / harmful to host.
 Commensalism   
 Species 1 is unaffected / species 2 benefits.
  i.e., barnacles on a whale
 Foundation Species    
oA species that are physically dominant (largest and/or most abundan t) in a community).
 The most abundant trees in a forest, reed building corals, common grass es.
 Anything that threatens them will likely negatively impact other spe cies in the community.
 Keystone Species   
oA species that has an unexpectedly strong effect on the stability or diversity of a community that is 
much larger than its abundance or biomass would suggest.


 Trophic Levels   
oAny of the sequential stages in a food chain
 Level 1: Producers
 Organisms that make simple organic food molecules from inorganic ra w materials using light 
energy to obtain nutrients.
 Tomato  > Caterpillar > Small Bird > Large Bird
 Level 2: Primary Consumers
 Organisms that consume or feed on plants (herbivores)
  Tomato > Caterpillar  > Small Bird > Large Bird
 Level 3: Secondary Consumers
 Organisms that consume or feed on primary consumers (carnivores or omnivores)
  Tomato > Caterpillar > Small Bird  > Large Bird
 Level 4: Tertiary Consumers
 Organisms that consume secondary consumers (large predators)
  Tomato > Caterpillar > Small Bird > Large Bird
 Level 5: Quaternary Consumer
 Top of the food chain.
 Detritivores   
 Animals that feed on dead organic matter
  Earthworms, vultures, etc.
 Decomposers   
 Bacteria and fungi that colonize dead material and absorb food molecules.
 At the end, Detritivores  and Decomposers  extract remaining calories and nutrients, releasing 
simple inorganic wastes to the environment, making chemical elem ents available for Producers .
 Energy Pyramid   
oThe transfer of energy passed up through the Trophic Levels .
 On average, only 10% of available energy in one Trophic Level  is incorporated and stores as 
calories in the bodies of the next level up.
 Rest of energy is released undigested in feces or dissipated as hea t.
  Once released it is inaccessible as a form of energy for l iving things.
 Biochemical Cycles   
oPathways that chemical elements follow through ecosystems involving l ife (bio) and nonliving 
components (geo).
 Water Cycle   
 Importance: Solvent that makes up most of the mass of all liv ing cells and stabilizes 
temperature.
 Reservoirs: Air, groundwater, ice, salt, and freshwater bodies.
 Driving Process: Evaporation and precipitation.
 Carbon Cycle   
 Importance: Forms backbone of carbs, lipids, proteins, and nucleic a cids.
 Reservoirs:  Air, dissolved in water, soil, rock.
 Driving Process: Cellular respiration and photosynthesis (also bur ning of fossil fuels).
 Nitrogen Cycle   
 Importance: Found in proteins and nucleic acids.
 Reservoirs: Air, dissolved in water, soil.
 Driving Process: Bacterial action
  i.e., bacteria convert N2 gas from the air to usable form for  producers.


Module 24: Human Impact
 Identify factors related to human activities and population size tha t impact the environment.
 Recognize the importance of biodiversity and ways it can be threatene d.
Key Terms:  biodiversity, ecosystem, climate change, genetic diversity, pollution, renewable resource, 
species richness, sustainable technology, non-renewable resource,  ecosystem diversity


