SOC 101
Chapter 1: Part 1
Sociology is
 the systematic study of human society and social interaction. 
 Using scientific research in studying human society and social  interaction. 
 Sociologists study societies and social interactions to deve lop theories of :
 How human behavior is shaped by group life.
 How group life is affected by individuals.
What is society?
 It is a group of people who live in the same territory  location  and they have the same 
culture, the same language, customs, traditions, and beli efs.
 It is a large social grouping that shares the same geogr aphical territory and is subject to 
the same political authority and dominant cultural expect ations, such as the United 
States, Mexico, or Nigeria.
The Sociological Imagination
 The ability to see the relationship  between individual experiences  and the larger 
society.
 Distinguishes between personal troubles  and social issues .
Personal Troubles


 Personal troubles  are private problems that affect individuals and the networks of 
people with which they associate regularly. 
 Example: One person being unemployed or running up a h igh credit card debt 
could be identified as a personal trouble. 
Public Issues
 Public issues  are problems that affect large numbers of people and require solutions at 
the societal level. 
 Widespread unemployment and massive, nationwide consumer debt are 
examples of public issues.
What is sociological perspective?
 It is the angle from which we see the world or realit y
 Understanding human behavior by placing it within its broader social context.
Why Study Sociology?
 Helps us gain a better understanding of ourselves and ou r social world.
 Helps us see how behavior is shaped by the groups to which  we belong and our society.
 Promotes understanding and tolerance by helping us look b eyond personal experiences 
and gain insight into the larger world order.
The origins of sociology


 For a long time people have been trying to answer this question, how does the human 
society work? Why people kill each other? Why do people make  wars? Why are there 
poor and rich people? Why do some people have power and  some do not?
 In the ancient time, people tried to  answer these que stions through myth, superstition, 
and sometimes astrology?  
 as a scientific method to answer these questions was a re sult of ashes of three 
revolutions:
1- Industrial Revolution and Enlightenment 
2- Democratic Revolution  French and American Revolution 
3- Scientific Revolution
Industrial Revolution
 The Industrial Revolution occurred in the 19th and 20t h centuries, when economic, 
technological, and social changes occurred as technology shifte d from agriculture to 
manufacturing.
 Industrialization  is the process by which societies are transformed from dep endence on
agriculture and handmade products to an emphasis on manu facturing and related 
industries. 
1) Land and the culture of patience 
2) Moving to the city
3) Working in factories under difficult Circumstances 


4) New social circumstances, and the old answers no longer co uld be counted 
on. 
Democratic Revolution
 The French Revolution (1789-1799)
 The American Revolution 1763-1776 
Democratic Revolution
American and French revolutions
 1) monarchies gave way to democratic governments
2) individuals inalienable rights
3) traditional ideas can not answer the questions of ne w area. 
Scientific Revolution
 Factories and industrial revolution led to the flourish  of innovations and new machines.
 New scientific explanations
August Comte
 Considered the  founder of sociology. 
 Comte s philosophy became known as positivism  a belief tha t the world can best be 
understood through scientific inquiry.


 Comte believed objective, bias-free knowledge was attain able only through the use of 
science rather than religion.
 Two Dimensions Of Comte s Positivism
1. Methodological: the application of scientific knowle dge to physical and social phenomena.
2. Social and political: the use of such knowledge to pr edict the likely results of different policies 
so that the best one could be chosen.


