COM 315
October 24th, 2019
Chapter 11
Inclusive Workplace Model
 Level 1:  Inclusion through diversity WITHIN the wo rk organization (existing or 
potential employee recruitment , mentoring , training  programs).
 Level 2:  Inclusion through CORPORATE-COMMUNITY COL LABORATIONS 
(provides improved diversity and/or inclusion services to t he community in which the 
organization operates; need a clear link between the pr ogram and the resulting impact of
the program on social and environmental benefits ).
 Level 3:  Inclusion through STATE/NATIONAL COLLABOR ATIONS (focuses on 
training disadvantaged groups (e.g., welfare recipients , domestic violence victims, 
individuals with criminal justice histories, youth in dist ress, women and people of color, 
and other under-represented groups (frequently involve collaboration with governmental 
groups).
 Level 4:  Inclusion through INTERNATIONAL COLLABORA TIONS (focus on global 
mutual interests; improved health and safety conditions, expanded geographic markets, 
better marketing to international customers,  or simply an improved corporate image with
customers , financial institutions, and stockholders.  Level 4 progra ms focus on creating 
respectful cultural relationships with individuals and gr oups in other countries).


  Leaders motivate  and enable  others to do important  things well .
Management  vs. Leadership
Management:
 Planning and Budgeting
 Organizing and Staffing
 Controlling & Problem Solving
 Produces a degree of predictability  and order .
Leadership:
 Establishing Direction
 Aligning People
 Motivating and Inspiring
 Producing Change
Chapter 11 Overview
1. Leadership Dilemmas and the Diversity Paradox
2. Transformational Leadership, Inclusive Leadership, and  the Organization s Competitive 
Advantage
3. Organizational Leadership and Inclusion
  Inclusive Leadership
  Inclusive Leadership From the Top:  The Central Role of CEOs
4. Inclusive Leadership at the Supervisor Level:  Leader-M ember Exchange (LMX)


An Overview of the Inclusive Workplace
  Although some dimensions of organizational leadership are universal, others are culture-
specific and the ability of leaders to manage a diverse w orkforce is becoming central for 
their ability to perform their jobs effectively. 
  Cultural awareness and competence are essential for eff ective leadership in the context 
of diversity
  Cultural intelligence   the ability to behave approp riately in cross-cultural settings, an 
ability that encompasses cognitive  (knowledge), emotional  (motivational, mindfulness, 
attitudes), and behavioral  dimensions
   a system of interacting knowledge and skills , linked by cultural metacognition that 
allows people to adapt to, select, and shape the cultur al aspects of their environment. 
Leadership Dilemmas and the Diversity Paradox
  Leaders have an important role in inspiring organizati ons to become more inclusive.
  One of the obstacles for reaping the benefits of diversi ty in organizations has been 
termed the   diversity paradox :  If leaders embrace diversity , they risk workplace 
conflicts, distrust, and tension, but if they avoid diversi ty, they risk losing their 
organizational potential for innovation, creativity, and productivity. 
Solution to Diversity Paradox: Inclusive Leadership
  Solution to paradox is inclusive leadership
  Minimize (or avoid) intergroup conflicts, tension, and d istrust
  Two paths   as a result of diversity in organizations
  One leading to competitive advantage
  One leading to loss of competitive advantage


Chapter 11 Summary
1. Leadership Dilemmas and the Diversity Paradox
2. Transformational Leadership, Inclusive Leadership, and  the Organization s Competitive 
Advantage
3. Organizational Leadership and Inclusion
  Inclusive Leadership
  Inclusive Leadership From the Top:  The Central Role of CEOs
4. Inclusive Leadership at the Supervisor Level:  Leader-M ember Exchange (LMX)


