1.) Statistics
Answer: The art and science of collecting, analyzing, presenting , and interpreting data
2.) Data
Answer: The facts and figures collected, analyzed, and summarize d for presentation and interpretation
3.) Data set
Answer: All the data collected in a particular study
4.) Elements
Answer: The entities on which data are collected
5.) Variable
Answer: A characteristic of interest for the elements
6.) Observation
Answer: The set of measurements obtained for a particular element
7.) Nominal scale
Answer: The scale of measurement for a variable when the data ar e labels or names used to identify an 
attribute of an element. Nominal data may be nonnumeric or numeri c


8.) Ordinal scale
Answer: The scale of measurement for a variable if the data exhi bit the properties of nominal data and 
the order or rank of the data is meaningful. Ordinal data may b e nonnumeric or numeric
9.) Interval scale
Answer: The scale of measurement for a variable if the data demon strate the properties of ordinal and 
the interval between values is expressed in terms of a fixed unit of me asure. Interval data are always 
numeric
10.) Ratio scale
Answer: The scale of measurement for a variable if the data demon strate all the properties of interval 
data and the ratio of two values is meaningful. Ratio data are alway s numeric
11.) Categorical data
Answer: Labels or names used to identify an attribute of each element . Categorical data use either the 
nominal or ordeal scale of measurement and may be nonnumeric or numer ic
12.) Quantitative data
Answer: Numeric values that indicate how much or how many of someth ing. Quantitative data are 
obtained using either the interval or ratio scale of measurement
13.) Categorical variable
Answer: A variable with categorical data
14.) Quantitative variable


Answer: A variable with quantitative data
15.) Cross-sectional data
Answer: Data collected at the same or approximately the same p oint in time
16.) Time series data
Answer: Data collected over several time periods
17.) Descriptive statistics
Answer: Tabular, graphical, and numerical summaries of data
18.) Population
Answer: The set of all elements of interest in a particular study
19.) Sample
Answer: A subset of the population
20.) Census
Answer: A survey to collect data on the entire population
21.) Sample survey


Answer: A survey to collect data on a sample
22.) Statistical inference
Answer: The process of using data obtained from a sample to make estim ates or test hypothesis about 
the characteristics of a population
23.) Data mining
Answer: The process of using procedures from statistics and computer  science to extract useful 
information from extremely large databases


