The American Yawp
 Introduction
oHumans have lived in the Americans for over 10,000 years
oDynamic and diverse, they spoke hundreds of languages and created  
thousands of distinct cultures
oThe arrival of Europeans and the resulting global exchange of people, 
animals, plants and microbes   the Columbian Exchange- bridge d more 
than 10,000 years of geographic separation, inaugurated c enturies of 
violence, unleashed the greatest biological terror the world  had ever seen,
and revolutionized the history of the world
 The First Americans 
oNative Americans passed down stories through the millennia th at tell of 
their creation and reveal the contours of indigenous belief
oThe Salinan people of what is now California tell of a bald eagle that 
formed the first man out of clay and the first woman out of a  feather
oAccording to a Lenape tradition the earth was made when Sky Woman fell
into a watery world, with the help of a muskrat and beaver l anded safely 
on a turtle s back thus creating Turtle Island (North America)
oThe last global ice age trapped much of the world s wate r in enormous 
continental glaciers
o20,000 years ago, ice sheets, extended across North America as f ar south
as Illinois
oWith so much of the world s water captured in these massi ve ice sheets, 
global sea levels were much lower, and a land bridge conne cted Asia and 
North America across the Bering Strait
oGlacial sheets receded about 14,000 years ago, opening a co rridor to 
warmer climates and new resources, some migrating south and eastw ard
oModern native American communities recount histories in America that 
date long before human memory
oIn the Northwest, Native groups exploited the great salmon-fi lled rivers
oOn the plains and prairie lands, hunting communities foll owed bison herds 
and moved according to seasonal patterns
oAgriculture arose sometime between 5,000-9,000 years ago 
oMesoamericans in modern-day Mexico and central America relied on 
domesticated maize (corn) to develop the hemisphere s first set tled 
population around 1200 BCE
o3 crops in particular corn, beans and squash, known as the Three Sisters 
  provided nutritional needs necessary to sustain cities and ci vilations
oMany groups used shifting cultivation , in which farmers cut the forest, 
burned the undergrowth, and then planted seeds in the n utrient-rich ashes
 When crop yields began to decline, farmers moved to another f ield 
and allowed the land to recover and the forest to regrow b efore 
again cutting the forest, burning the undergrowth, and r estarting the
cycle.


oTypically, in Woodland communities, women practiced agriculture  while 
men hunted and fished.
oMany Native cultures understood ancestry as matrilineal: family and clan 
identity proceeded along the female line, through moth ers and daughters, 
rather than fathers and sons
oFathers, for instance, often joined mothers  extended famili es, and 
sometimes even a mother s brothers took a more direct role in chil d-
raising than biological fathers. 
oTherefore, mothers often wielded enormous influence at loca l levels, and 
men s identities and influence often depended on their re lationships to 
women.
oChaco Canyon in northern New Mexico was home to ancestral Pu ebloan 
peoples between 900 and 1300 CE. As many as fifteen tho usand 
individuals lived in the Chaco Canyon complex in present-day New 
Mexico.
o Puebloan spirituality was tied both to the earth and th e heavens, as 
generations carefully charted the stars and designed homes in l ine with 
the path of the sun and moon
oAs with many of the peoples who lived in the Woodlands, l ife and death in 
Cahokia were linked to the movement of the stars, sun, and moon, and 
their ceremonial earthwork structures reflect these important structuri ng 
forces.
oSlavery
  War captives were enslaved, and these captives formed an 
important part of the economy in the North American Southeast .
 Native American slavery was not based on holding people as 
property. Instead, Native Americans understood slaves as people 
who lacked kinship networks
 Slavery, then, was not always a permanent condition.
 Very often, a former slave could become a fully integrated m ember 
of the community. Adoption or marriage could enable a sl ave to 
enter a kinship network and join the community
 Slavery and captive trading became an important way that many 
Native communities regrew and gained or maintained power.
oAround 1050, Cahokia experienced what one archaeologist ha s called a 
 big bang,  which included  a virtually instantaneous and pe rvasive shift in 
all things political, social, and ideological.  15 The population grew almost 
500 percent in only one generation, and new people group s were 
absorbed into the city and its supporting communities. By 1300 , the once-
powerful city had undergone a series of strains that led to collapse
 European Expansion
oScandinavian seafarers reached the New World long before Col umbus
oAt their peak they sailed as far east as Constantinople and  raided 
settlements as far south as North Africa.
oThey established limited colonies in Iceland and Greenland and around 
the year 1000, Leif Erikson reached Newfoundland, Canada


oThe Norse colony failed and were driven back to sea by food sho rtages, 
limited resources bad weather and native resistance 
oCenturies before Columbus, the Crusades linked Europe with t he wealth, 
power and knowledge of Asia.
oEuropeans rediscovered or adopted Greek, Roman and Muslim 
knowledge
oA series of military conflicts between England and France   t he 100 years  
war   accelerated nationalism and cultivated the financial and military 
administration necessary to maintain nation-states
oIn Spain, the marriage between Ferdinand of Aragon and Isabella of 
Castile consolidated the 2 most powerful kingdoms in the Ibe rian 
peninsula
oThe Crusades had never ended in Iberia: the Spanish crown concluded 
centuries of intermittent warfare the Reconquista by expelling  Muslim 
Moors and Iberian Jews from the Iberian peninsula in 1492, j ust as 
Christopher Columbus sailed west. 
oWith new power, these new nations and their newly empower ed 
monarchs yearned to access the wealth of Asia.
oSeafaring Italian traders commanded the Mediterranean and con trolled 
trade with Asia. Spain and Portugal, at the edges of Eu rope, relied on 
middlemen and paid higher prices for Asian goods. 
oThey sought a more direct route. And so they looked to the At lantic. 
Portugal invested heavily in exploration. 
oFrom his estate on the Sagres Peninsula of Portugal, a rich sailing port, 
Prince Henry the Navigator (Infante Henry, Duke of Viseu) inve sted in 
research and technology and underwrote many technological 
breakthroughs.
oIn the fifteenth century, Portuguese sailors perfected the  astrolabe, a tool 
to calculate latitude, and the caravel, a ship well suit ed for ocean 
exploration.  
oBlending economic and religious motivations, the Portugues e established 
forts along the Atlantic coast of Africa during the fifte enth century, 
inaugurating centuries of European colonization there. 
oPortuguese trading posts generated new profits that funded  further trade 
and further colonization. Trading posts spread across the vast co astline of 
Africa, and by the end of the fifteenth century, Vasco da  Gama 
leapfrogged his way around the coasts of Africa to reach Indi a and other 
lucrative Asian markets. (Sailed around the tip of Africa to Asia)
oSugar was originally grown in Asia but became a popular, wi dely profitable
luxury item consumed by European nobility
oThe Portuguese used their Atlantic islands (the Azores) to gro w sugarcane
and support sugar production
 Portuguese merchants, who had recently established good 
relations with powerful African kingdoms such as Kongo, Ndong a, 
and Songhai, looked then to African slaves. 


 Slavery had long existed among African societies. African lead ers 
traded war captives who by custom forfeited their freedom in 
battle for Portuguese guns, iron, and manufactured goods. F
 rom bases along the Atlantic coast, the largest in modern-day 
Nigeria, the Portuguese began purchasing slaves for export to  the 
Atlantic islands to work the sugar fields. Thus were born the  first 
great Atlantic plantations.
oChristopher Columbus
 Born in Italy and trained in Portugal
 Convinced Ferdinand and Isabella to provide him 3 smalls ships 
and set sail for the New World in 1492
 Nina, Pinta and Santa Maria
 After 2 months at seas, the Columbus landed in the Bahama s
 The indigenous Arawaks, or Ta no, populated the Caribbean  
islands. They fished and grew corn, yams, and cassava.
 But Columbus had come for wealth and he could find litt le. The 
Arawaks, however, wore small gold ornaments. 
 Columbus left thirty-nine Spaniards at a military fort on Hispa niola 
to find and secure the source of the gold while he returne d to 
Spain, with a dozen captured and branded Arawaks
 If outfitted for a return voyage, Columbus promised the Spa nish 
crown gold and slaves.
 Columbus was outfitted with seventeen ships and over one 
thousand men to return to the West Indies (Columbus made fou r 
voyages to the New World)
 By presuming the natives had no humanity, the Spaniards utte rly 
abandoned theirs
 All told, in fact, some scholars estimate that as much as 90 p ercent 
of the population of the Americas perished within the fi rst century 
and a half of European contact
 Spanish Exploration and Conquest
oEcomiendas
oThe Spanish managed labor relations through a legal system known as 
the encomienda , an exploitive feudal arrangement in which Spain tied 
Indian laborers to vast estates.
oIn the  encomienda , the Spanish crown granted a person not only land but 
a specified number of natives as well.  Encomenderos brutalized their 
laborers. 
oAfter Bartolom  de Las Casas published his incendiary account of 
Spanish abuses ( The Destruction of the Indies ), Spanish authorities 
abolished the  encomienda  in 1542 and replaced it with the  repartimiento .
oIntended as a milder system, the  repartimiento  nevertheless replicated 
many of the abuses of the older system, and the rapacious explo itation of 
the Native population continued as Spain spread its empire over the 
Americas.
oCentral American Civilizations


oThe Aztecs
 Militaristic migrants from northern Mexico, the Aztecs moved south 
into the Valley of Mexico, conquered their way to dominance , and 
built the largest empire in the New World. 
 When the Spaniards arrived in Mexico they found a sprawling 
civilization centered around Tenochtitl n, an awe-inspiring  city built 
on a series of natural and man-made islands in the middle of Lake 
Texcoco, located today within modern-day Mexico City. 
 Tenochtitl n, founded in 1325, rivaled the world s large st cities in 
size and grandeur. Much of the city was built on large arti ficial 
islands called  chinampas , which the Aztecs constructed by 
dredging mud and rich sediment from the bottom of the lake an d 
depositing it over time to form new landscapes. 
 A massive pyramid temple, the Templo Mayor, was located at th e 
city center (its ruins can still be found in the center of M exico City).  
oHernan Cortes
 34 year old Spaniard who had won riches in Cuba organized the 
invasion of Mexico in 1519
 He was assisted by a local translator, Dona Marina (La Malin che)
 Through persuasion, and maybe because some Aztecs thought 
Cort s was the god Quetzalcoatl, the Spaniards entered 
Tenochtitl n peacefully. 
 Cort s then captured the emperor Montezuma and used him to 
gain control of the Aztecs  gold and silver reserves and thei r 
network of mines
 The Spaniards  eighty-five-day siege cut off food and fresh water. 
Smallpox ravaged the city.  
oThe Incas
 The Andes Mountains of South America
 From their capital of Cuzco in the Andean highlands, th rough 
conquest and negotiation, the Incas built an empire t hat stretched 
around the western half of the South American continent from 
present day Ecuador to central Chile and Argentina
 Smallpox hit the empire in 1525
 A bloody war of succession ensued. Inspired by Cort s s  conquest
of Mexico, Francisco Pizarro moved south and found an empi re 
torn by chaos. 
 With 168 men, he deceived Incan rulers and took cont rol of the 
empire and seized the capital city, Cuzco, in 153
oRacial Superiority
 An elaborate racial hierarchy marked Spanish life in the  New 
World. 


 Regularized in the mid-1600s but rooted in medieval p ractices, the
Sistema de Castas  organized individuals into various racial groups
based on their supposed  purity of blood.  
 Elaborate classifications became almost prerequisites  for social 
and political advancement in Spanish colonial socie ty. 
 Peninsulares  Iberian-born Spaniards, or  espa oles  occupied 
the highest levels of administration and acquired the greatest 
estates. 
 Their descendants, New World-born Spaniards, or  criollos , 
occupied the next rung and rivaled the  peninsulares  for wealth 
and opportunity.  
 Mestizos  a term used to describe those of mixed Spanish and 
Indian heritage followed.
 The Catholic Church endorsed interracial marriage as a  moral 
bulwark against bastardy and rape
 By the early 1700s, more than one third of all marriages  bridged 
the Spanish-Indian divide. 
 Separated by wealth and influence from 
the peninsulares  and criollos , mestizos typically occupied a 
middling social position in Spanish New World societ y. They 
were not quite Indios , or Indians, but their lack of limpieza de 
sangre , or  pure blood,  removed them from the privileges of fu ll-
blooded Spaniards. 
 Spanish fathers of sufficient wealth and influence migh t shield 
their mestizo children from racial prejudice, and a numb er of 
wealthy mestizos married espa oles  to  whiten  their family 
lines, but more often mestizos were confined to a midd le station in
the Spanish New World. 
 Slaves and Indians occupied the lowest rungs of the soc ial ladder.
 In 1531, a poor Indian named Juan Diego reported that he was 
visited by the Virgin Mary, who came as a dark-skinned  Nahuatl-
speaking Indian.
 Reports of miracles spread across Mexico and the Virgen  de 
Guadalupe became a national icon for a new mestizo so ciety.
oPresent Day America


 Juan Ponce de Le n, the conqueror of Puerto Rico, landed  in 
Florida in 1513 in search of wealth and slaves.  lvar N   ez 
Cabeza de Vaca joined the Narv ez expedition to Flor ida a decade
later but was shipwrecked and forced to embark on a rema rkable 
multiyear odyssey across the Gulf of Mexico and Texas i nto 
Mexico. 
 Pedro Men ndez de Avil s founded St. Augustine, Flori da, in 
1565, and it remains the oldest continuously occupie d European 
settlement in the present-day United States.
  Still, Spanish expeditions combed North America. Fran cisco 
V zquez de Coronado pillaged his way across the Sou thwest. 
Hernando de Soto tortured and raped and enslaved his wa y across 
the Southeast.
 Conclusion
oHenry Dobyns estimated that in the first 130 years followin g European 
contact, 95 percent of Native Americans perished
o


