COM 315
November 7th, 2019
Chapter 14
Corporate Social Performance (CSP) & Corporate Soci al Responsibility (CSR)
  One criteria to assess Fortune 500 s most admired compan ies
  Economic activities have non-economic consequences
  Both terms expand a company s responsibilities beyond its traditional economic 
shareholders to multiple stakeholders, including the comm unity
  Contribute to the welfare of the community to create goodwill
Chapter 14 Overview
  Inclusion through Corporate-Community Collaborations - Value Base
  Inclusive Policies and Practices
  Barriers and Benefits of Implementing the Inclusive App roach at Level II
  Case illustration:  Level II Inclusion through Corpora te-Community Collaboration 
Unilever   
  Unilever and Palm Oil
  Importance of Palm Oil
  The Oil Palm Tree Industry
  Current Trends


Inclusion through Corporate-Community COLLABORATION S
 Level II:   Community Level 
 Inclusion through CORPORATE-COMMUNITY COLLABORATION S (provides 
improved diversity and/or inclusion services  to the community in which the 
organization operates; 
  need a clear link between the program and the resulting impact of the program on 
social and environmental benefits ).
 Level II Inclusion
  Relates to the organization s sense of being a part of its surrounding community  
and the reciprocity embedded in this relationship
  Reflects the   mezzo   system level of organizations and communities
Level II Case Illustration:  Unilever Inclusion thr ough Corporate-Community 
Collaboration
  Unilever and Palm Oil
  Importance of Palm Oil
  The Oil Palm Tree Industry
  Current Trends
  Impact of Palm Plantations
  Environmental
  Social


  Economic
  Unilever s Sustainability Development
  Sustainable Agriculture Initiative
  Implementation of the Sustainable Development Plan
  Unilever s Current Involvement in Palm Oil
  Divesting of Plantations
  Helping Ghana Grow Oil Palm Plantations
  Unilever Foundation
  Unilever and Palm Oil. In 1850, the UK repealed a tax on soap which prompted William 
Lever to enter the soap business. In 1930, Lever s company joined with Margarine Unie 
to form the Unilever group. Since then, Unilever has e volved into one of the world's 
largest consumer goods companies. 
  Impact of Palm Plantations. People living in palm p lantation areas have felt the impact of
the industry in numerous ways: 
  Environmentally - Rainforests have been converted into palm plantations 
resulting in a rise in pests, changes in the flow of gro und surface water, 
increased land erosion, and pollution of rivers and dri nking water
  Socially   Often times, indigenous people are relocate d to make room for 
plantations
  Economically - Low wages for plantation workers, large non-local companies are 
noted for failing to promote the local economy


Unilever's Sustainability Development. In 1995, Unileve r commissioned two studies on 
sustainable development. The studies revealed a complex set  of criteria for sustainable 
agriculture that targeted the triple bottom line   e conomics , environment  and society  and 
resulted in several honors for the company.
  Sustainable Agriculture Initiative. Unilever used its Su stainable Development 
commitment and experience to facilitate a broader impa ct. They were one of the 
three founding companies of the Sustainable Agriculture  Initiative (SAI). SAI was 
created to actively support the development and communicat ion of sustainable 
agriculture practices worldwide. 
  Unilever's Current Involvement in Palm Oil. Divesting o f Plantations; helping 
Ghana grow oil palm plantations; helping the Ghanaia n government implement 
its oil palm tree initiative
Chapter 14 Summary
  Inclusion through Corporate-Community Collaborations - Value Base
  Inclusive Policies and Practices
  Barriers and Benefits of Implementing the Inclusive App roach at Level II
  Case illustration:  Level II Inclusion through Corpora te-Community Collaboration 
Unilever   
  Unilever and Palm Oil
  Importance of Palm Oil
  The Oil Palm Tree Industry


  Current Trends


