COM 315
Oct. 17th 2019
Chapter 10 Overview
1. Defining Diversity Management
2. From Equal Rights Laws to Affirmative/Positive Action to Diversity Man agement
3. Diversity Management Paradigms
 The Human Resource Paradigm
 The Multicultural Organization Paradigm
 Models of Global Diversity Management
4. The Impetus for Implementing Diversity Management
5. Characteristics and Limitations of Diversity Management
Defining Diversity Management
 Diversity management refers to the voluntary organizational ac tions  that are designed to create 
greater inclusion of employees from various backgrounds into the formal  and informal  
organizational structures through deliberate policies and programs (Mor Barak, 2005, 2011, 
2014).
Types of Diversity Management
 Intra  national Diversity Management
 Managing a diverse workforce of citizens and immigrants within  a single national context
 Cross  -national Diversity Management
 Managing a diverse workforce composed of people working in differ ent countries
 BOTH Approaches have unique challenges
From Equal Rights Laws . . . to Affirmative/Positive Action . . . to Diversit y Management
Diversity Management for All Workers


 The true meaning of diversity suggests that if you are concerne d about racism, you include all races; if 
you re concerned about gender, you include both[/all] gender s; or if you re concerned about age issues, 
you include all age groups.  In other words, the mixture is all inc lusive  (Thomas, 1996 pp. 146-7). 
Diversity Management Paradigm #1
 The Human Resource Paradigm in Diversity Management
 Diversity Enlargement
 Goal is to change organizational culture by changing workforce c omposition
 Strategy is to recruit employees from diverse backgrounds
 Assumption is new hires will change culture with their presence; no n eed for 
additional intervention
 Diversity Sensitivity
 GOAL:  Overcome adversity and promote productive communication an d 
collaboration; improve communication
 STRATEGY:  Training to increase sensitivity to differences
 ASSUMPTIONS:  Increased sensitivity to differences will positively i mpact 
performance
 Cultural Audit
 GOAL:  Identify obstacles faced by employees of diverse backgroun ds and 
modify company practices accordingly
 STRATEGY:  Audit current practices through surveys and focus group s and 
generate changes to address these deficiencies
 ASSUMPTIONS:  Problems are caused by the dominant cultural grou p in the 
organization and needs to be addressed by that group.
 Strategy for Achieving Organizational Outcomes
 GOAL:  Achieving organizational goals through diversity manag ement
 STRATEGY:  Integrate diversity management with HR Policies a nd other company 
strategic choices
 ASSUMPTIONS:  Diversity management practices have to be linke d to desired 
individual and organizational outcomes
Diversity Management Paradigm #2
 The Monolithic Organization


 An organization that is demographically and culturally homog enous
 The Plural Organization
 An organization that has a heterogeneous  workforce
 The Multicultural Organization (Ideal)
 Characterized by a culture that fosters and values cultural di fferences and equally 
incorporates all members of the organization via acculturation.
Characteristics of Diversity Management
 Voluntary   -  initiated by the organization
 Uses Broad Definitions of Diversity   makes programs inclusive and reduces objections from 
majority group members
 Aims at providing Tangible Benefits to the Company
 Productive and loyal workforce
 Provides advantages in recruitment and reputation
 Creates good will and a competitive advantage
Limitations of Diversity Management
 Voluntary   -  may not survive during difficult economic times
 Uses Broad Definitions of Diversity   most vulnerable groups many not be protected; resources 
may spread across many groups
 Tangible Benefits   to the Company
 Disappears when there is a lack of moral or ethical commitment; or wh en DM is no 
longer perceived as beneficial
Diversity Management
 To overcome the potential limitations, diversity management has to focus on both 1) enhancing 
profitability and 2) fostering social justice.
Chapter 10 Summary
1. Defining Diversity Management
2. From Equal Rights Laws to Affirmative/Positive Action to Diversity Man agement


3. Diversity Management Paradigms
 The Human Resource Paradigm
 The Multicultural Organization Paradigm
 Models of Global Diversity Management
4. The Impetus for Implementing Diversity Management
5. Characteristics and Limitations of Diversity Management


