COM 315
October 15th, 2019
Chapter 9:  Interpersonal Relationships in a Global  Work Context
Chapter 09 Overview
1.Cultural Styles and Relational Mental Models
2.Diversity in Interpersonal Relationships
  Emotional Detachment vs. Emotional Involvement
  Conflict and Harmony
3.Interpersonal Relationships and Cross-Cultural Comm unication
4.Theoretical Perspectives on Interpersonal Cross-Cul tural Communication
 Cultural Context Continuum  [Low Context   High Context]
 Cultural Value Continuum [Individualism   Collectivism]
 Face and Harmony Orientation
 Relationship vs. Task Orientation (Conflict)
 Direct vs. Indirect Communication
  What is the   Inclusive Workplace Model   what does it do? (pp. 7-10)
  Provides a comprehensive model for diversity management  that accepts and 
utilizes the diversity of its own workforce , while being active in the community , 


in state  and federal programs , and that collaborates across cultural  and 
national boundaries.  
Level I :  Diversity and Inclusion Programs WITHIN the Organizatio n (e.g., targeted recruiting)
Level II :  Diversity and Inclusion Programs in the Community (e. g., supporting community 
organizations)
Level III :  Diversity and Inclusion Programs in State and Federal Programs (e.g., supporting 
community organizations)
Level IV :  Diversity and Inclusion Programs in International Pr ograms(e.g., Disney s Global 
Equality Institute)
Part III:  Managing a Diverse Workforce in the Glob al Context:
THE INCLUSIVE WORKPLACE
The Darkside of Organizational Relationships (Favori tism)
  Nepotism - partiality to family
  Cronyism   partiality to partner or friend
Cultural Styles and Relational Mental Models
   Culture Neutral  interpersonal style does not exist
  We know about cultural differences, but bias often lea ds us to
  Devalue others  relational work styles
  View styles as incorrect or unprofessional


 Paradigm    pattern or model  (synonyms:  dogma, world view, mindset, 
tradition, habit);  a system of rules  that 1) sets limi ts or boundaries and 2) 
provides guidance for solving problems.
Relational Mental Models
  Created in cultural contexts where people are raised, e ducated/trained, and start their 
jobs
  Relational Mental Models are  schemas that structure our  perceptions and the way we 
communicate and relate to others.  
Relational Mental Models can . . .
  be unique to a particular culture
  reflect broad cultural dimensions
At work, relational mental models shape . . . 
 what people notice
 what they take away from business meetings
 the degree to which the coordinate nonverbal behaviors
 manager s perceptions of what motivates employees
Cultural Styles and Relational Mental Models


Relational mental models that emphasize interconnections in business relationships
  China -  quanxi  - one is expected to attend carefully to the interconnecti ons among 
business colleagues and partners
   Korea - chaebol  - or company familialism, structures business relationships to  reflect 
both work and personal features
  Mexico - simpatia - places importance on proactively creating rapport and per sonal 
connections
In contrast 
 The Protestant relational ideology in European-Ameri can culture maintains a 
sharp distinction between the relational mental models  used at work and outside 
work. 
Theoretical Perspectives on Interpersonal Cross-Cul tural Communication
1.Cultural Context Continuum [Low Context   High Context]
2.Cultural Value Continuum  [Individualism   Collectivism]
3. FACE NEGOTIATION THEORY
  Face and Harmony Orientation 
  Relationship vs. Task Orientation (Conflict)
  Direct vs. Indirect Communication
1. Cultural Context Continuum
Low and high context cultures


  Differ in the degree to which one must attend to in terpersonal and contextual
cues to understand communication 
High context cultures
 Meaning is derived from contextual cues in the setting
 Only minimal information from the literal interpreta tion of the message
 Words convey only a small part of the message
 Receiver needs to fill in the gaps
 Japan, China, Mexico, Chile
Low context cultures
 Information is conveyed within the transmitted message it self
 The actual words contain the meaning
 Not the context
 United States, Australia, Germany
Intergenerational Communication Example
 Higher-context cultures emphasize tradition  and history .  This focus on tradition
creates opportunities for higher context messages betwee n generations.  The resulting
stability enables traditions to be maintained.
 Lower-context cultures are different.  Here the shared experiences upon which
communication is built can change drastically from one g eneration to the next, creating
communication gaps between parents and children (e.g., United States)
Orientation Dimensions that Impact Cultural Communi cation
 Face and Harmony Orientation
   face  refers to an individual s public self-image
   harmony  is the process through which face is regulated  in each context


Relationship vs. Task Orientation
  Communication in the combined  task/relationship  me ntal model or the 
 differentiated mental model focuses on either achievin g the task or on 
the relationship as it relates to the task
Direct vs. Indirect Communication Orientation
  Indirect communication   one does not directly state wh at they mean; 
meaning is inferred
  Direct communication   one says what they mean
  Indirectness (strategic ambiguity) is an important commu nication strategy 
that varies according to cultural context, individualism-col lectivism, and 
relational styles
Face Negotiation Theory (1988)
  Intercultural conflict management styles can best be predi cted by self-construal 
(how autonomous from, or connected to, people you are) .
   Explains cultural differences in response to conflict. 
What is Face?           Facework?
  The projected image of one s self in a relational sit uation. 
  Specific verbal and nonverbal messages that help to mai ntain  and restore  face loss, 
and to uphold  and honor  face gain. 
FNT Description


 People who have an interdependent self-image in a coll ectivistic culture are 
concerned with giving other-face or mutual-face, so they adopt a conflict style of 
avoiding or integrating. 
 People who have an independent self-image in an indiv idualistic culture are 
concerned with protecting self-face, so they adopt a confli ct style of dominating.
Key Points
 Culture    individualistic, collectivistic
 Self-Construal   autonomous, connected to others
 Face Maintenance   self-face, other-face, mutual face
 Conflict Management 
  Avoiding (withdrawal)
  Obliging (giving in - accommodating)
  Compromising (negotiation   lose-lose)
 Integrating  (collaborative problem solving win-win)
  Dominating (competing)
Competent Intercultural Facework
  Ting-Toomey believes 
cultural knowledge , 
mindfulness , and facework interaction 


skills are requirements 
for effectively 
communicating 
across cultures.
Chapter 09 Summary
 Cultural Styles and Relational Mental Models
 Diversity in Interpersonal Relationships
  Emotional Detachment vs. Emotional Involvement
  Conflict and Harmony
 Interpersonal Relationships and Cross-Cultural Comm unication
 Theoretical Perspectives on Interpersonal Cross-Cul tural Communication
 Cultural Context Continuum  [Low Context   High Context]
 Cultural Value Continuum [Individualism   Collectivism]
 Face and Harmony Orientation
 Relationship vs. Task Orientation (Conflict)
 Direct vs. Indirect Communication




