wCritical Thinking T erms:
 Premise    The statements being offered in support of the co nclusion.
 Conclusion   is the statement being argued for.
 Non Propositions    are not statements about matters of fact (or ficti on). 
They do not make a claim that can be true or false.
 Deductive Arguments    Arguments where the premises guarantee or 
necessitate the conclusion. Leaves no question or p ossibility.
oExample: All rabbits have long ears. Bugs is a rabb it. Consequently, 
Bugs has long ears.
 Inductive Arguments    Arguments where the premises make the 
conclusion probable. (I think)
oExample: Because most penguins are from areas with cold climates, it 
is probable that the penguin you saw at the zoo was  from an area with 
a cold climate.
 Abduction Arguments    Arguments where the best available explanation is  
chosen as the correct explanation.
 Validity   In a good deductive argument structure, true premi ses make the 
conclusion necessarily true.
oExample: When I went outside this morning, the gras s was completely 
covered with dew. It must have rained last night.
 Valid Argument    It is not possible that the conclusion is false w hen the 
premises are true.
oExample: Ralph is a dog. No dogs are allowed on the  roller-coaster. 
Therefore, Ralph is not allowed on the roller-coast er.
 Invalid Argument    An argument is invalid when its conclusion is not  proven
by its premises.
oExample: If I am President then I am famous. I am n ot President. 
Therefore, I am not famous.
 Sound Argument    A sound argument is valid and has true premises.
oExample: All whales are mammals. Killer Whale is a whale. Therefore, 
Killer whale is a mammal.
oExample: All Planets in our solar system orbit the sun. Mars is a planet 
in our solar system. Therefore, Mars orbits the Sun .
 Unsound Argument    An argument is unsound when it is either invalid or 
has one or more false premises.
oExample: All dogs are mammals. Therefore, dogs are cows.
CONGENCY
 Uncogent Argument   There are three ways in which an argument can be 
uncogent:
1.It is weak: I am 40 years old. I have had oxygen to breath my who le life. 
Therefore, tomorrow I will not have oxygen to breat he.
2.The premises are false: All asteroids observed so far have contained 
chocolate fudge inside of them. Therefore, the next  asteroid to be 
observed will also contain chocolate fudge inside o f it.


3.It is weak AND the premises are false: T wo asteroids observed so far 
contain chocolate fudge inside of them. Therefore, the next asteroid to be 
observed will also contain chocolate fudge.
 Cogent Argument    is clear, logical, and convincing. Has two indica tors
1.Cogency only applies to inductive arguments.
2.An argument is cogent if it is strong, and the prem ises are true.
oExample: The Sun has risen every day for the past 5, 000 years; 
therefore, it will probably rise tomorrow.
 Affirming the Consequent    A fallacy that involves taking a true statement
and assuming the converse form would be true as wel l: If X, then Y . Y, 
Therefore, X.
 Denying the Antecedent    A formal fallacy of interring the inverse from th e
original statement: If P, then Q. Therefore, if not  P, then not Q.
oMy opponent argues that kangaroos can hop because h opping is 
something that kangaroos are able to do. Since my o pponent has 
committed the fallacy of begging the question, one must infer that 
their conclusion is false, and that kangaroos canno t hop.
 Modus  Ponens
 Modus Tollens
 Formal Fallacies   Have a bad structure.
 Fallacy   Is a type of bad argument.
TYPES OF FALLACIES
 Ad Hominem    is a type of informal logical fallacy. This is an  attack on the 
character of a person rather than his or her opinio ns or arguments.
 Straw Man    This fallacy oversimplifies an opponent s viewpoi nt and then 
attacks that hollow argument.
 Appeal to ignorance    is a claim that something must be true because it  
hasn t been proven false and vice versa.
oExample: There is no proof that God exists; therefo re, God does not 
exist.
 Appeal to Authority    the arguer claims an authority figure s expertise  to 
support a claim despite this expertise being irrele vant or overstated.
 Hasty Generalization    happens when someone uses inductive reasoning 
with evidence or a sample size that s too small to prove their point. 
Conclusions based on insufficient or biased evidenc e.


oThe car that just cut me off is from South Dakota, so all South 
Dakotans are jerks.
 Slippery Slope    This is the baseless assumption that once someone  has 
taken a step, the next steps automatically occur.
 Red Herring    Something that misleads or distracts from a relev ant or 
important question.
 Begging the Question    Occurs when an argument s premises assume the 
truth of the conclusion.
 Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc    is an informal fallacy that states:  Since 
event Y followed event X, event Y must have been ca used by event X. 
oExample: Nearly all heroin addicts used marijuana b efore they tried 
heroin. Clearly, marijuana use leads to heroin addi ction. 
 Equivocation    Occurs when a key term or phrase in an argument i s used in 
an ambiguous way, with one meaning in one portion o f the argument and 
then another meaning in another portion of the argu ment.
oExample: I have the right to watch  the Real World.  Therefore, it s 
right for me to watch the show.
oExample: Salad is healthy, and taco salad is a sala d. Therefore, taco 
salad is healthy.
 False Dichotomy    This fallacy takes a complex topic and falsely as serts 
that there are only two possible explanations, when  in fact more explanations
exist. (Black and White Thinking)
 The Fallacy fallacy   is when a claim has been poorl y argued that the claim 
itself must be wrong.
 Genetic Fallacy   This fallacy arises whenever we di smiss a claim or argument
because of its origin or history.
oExample: My parents told me that God exists; theref ore, God exists. 
oExample: My sixth-grade teacher, Mr. Harris, said t hat all women are 
bad drivers, so it must be true.
 Texas Sharpshooter fallacy    where an argument is made and confirmed 
using the exact same set of information. Instead of  looking at evidence and 
letting it determine what conclusion we develop, we  re letting our fixed 
conclusion determine how we treat the evidence (whic h is backwards).
 Burden of Proof shifting - 
CONSIDERING SOURCES OF INFORMATION
1.Is the website merely a host for people to post the ir own essays?
2.Is it someone s personal blog?
3.Is the website satire?
4.Is it a deeply ideological source pushing an agenda ? 
5.What facts from reliable sources are being used to support their claims?
6.Are the sources individuals, professionals, organiz ations, or government 
agencies?


7.Is it biased? All sources have come kind of bias, b ut some are more credible 
than others.
8.Is it thoughtful and honest? they are less likely just to be promoting a 
particular ideology. If not, then they are more lik ely to be doing so.  
9.Who funded it? Be distrustful of a study that has a vested interes t in finding a
particular outcome.
10.Does it try to get you to distrust  the others ?
11.Is it current? Is it local? Time and dates are impo rtant.
12.What are others saying about it? Another way of saf eguarding against being 
duped by false information is to look at the same n ews story or piece of 
information from multiple independent sources. 
13.Is it plausible? Go forward with researching the cl aims further through 
independent reliable sources only when you have dec ided it is at least 
plausible enough to warrant further investigation.
14.Is it convenient? Sometimes the truth really does f it a particular narrative, but
the more neatly and tidily it does, the more skepti cal you should be.
15.Is it possible that it is a deepfake? People using machine learning technology 
can create images, voices, and even videos, and at some point, 
distinguishing which videos are fake may become imp ossible.
TYPES OF BIASES
 Principle of Charity    Treat people like they re intelligent to better e valuate 
their arguments. It suggests we should try to under stand ideas before we 
disregard them. It is morally right to give others the benefit of the doubt. It 
allows for a clearer understanding of the issue.
 Confirmation bias    People s tendency to process information by looki ng 
for, or interpreting, information that is consisten t with their existing beliefs.
oExample: Some people point to the large number of u nidentified flying 
object sightings and the discovery of many earth-li ke planets in the 
universe as evidence of extraterrestrial life. I do n t take this evidence 
seriously though, because I do not believe in extra terrestrial life.
 Cognitive bias    refers to the systemic ways in which people categ orize and 
make sense of the world to make judgments and decis ions.
 Heuristics    Mental shortcuts for solving problems in a quick way that 
delivers a result that is sufficient enough to be u seful given time constraints.
 Availability Heuristic   A process where the mind generalizes based on 
what is available to it rather than what is objecti vely true.
 Representative Heuristic   is a cognitive bias in which an individual 
categorizes a new situation based on the nearest pr ototype or experience in 
their mind.
 Anchoring Bias    Occurs when a person arbitrarily emphasizes one p iece of 
evidence or experience (usually the first one) over o ther relevant pieces of 
evidence or experience.


oExample: Jones collects five pieces of evidence to support a  belief, but 
arbitrarily emphasizes the first piece of evidence.
 Availability Bias    is a cognitive bias in which an individual takes available 
information while not considering unknown informati on resulting in a person 
jumping to conclusions.
 Selection bias    A kind of error that occurs when the researcher d ecides 
who is going to be studied. It is usually associate d with research where the 
selection of participants isn't random.
 Alief   An automatic belief-like attitude that can explain  how our instinctual 
responses can conflict with our reasoned-out belief s.
System One   A near-instantaneous process; it happen s automatically, intuitively, 
and with little effort.
System T wo   is a more  analytical,   deliberate  and  r ational  side to the thinking 
process.


