A-1. Prepare for data collection.
1. Read data from last session.
2. Prepare data sheets and materials based on data from last session.
3. Determine what programs you plan to work on during the session.
4. Gather materials for those programs.
5. Set up the first set of programs so they are ready when you begin the session.
A-2. Implement continuous measurement procedures (frequency, duration).
Continuous measurement : Records every possible behavior occurrence
Frequency : Count per observation
Duration : Total amount of time in which a behavior occurs
Latency : Elapsed time between onset of a stimulus to the initiation of a response
Inter-Response Time (IRT) : Elapsed time between two successive responses
A-3. Implement discontinuous measurement procedures (partial and whole interval
momentary time sampling)
Discontinuous measurement : Records a sample of behavior during an observation
Partial : Did the behavior occur at all during the intervention
Whole : Did the behavior occur during the whole intervention
Momentary time sampling : Is the behavior occurring at this point in time
A-4. Implement permanent-product recording procedures.
Measuring behavior after it occurred by measuring tangible items or the effects a behavior has on
an environment.
For example : The number of windows broken, the number of homework problems completed,
the number of test questions answered correctly.
A-5. Enter data and update graphs.
RBTs may assist the BCBA with entering data and updating graphs. Although electronic data
may decrease the need for RBT assistance in this area, RBTs should still understand the purpose
of data and graphs and also be able to enter data and update graphs as requested by their
supervisor.


Data and graphs 
 Are important tools in determining effective interventions
 Are the collection of all data taken during the session
 Are the cornerstone of Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA)
 Can be taken and processed by hand or through computer programs such as Microsoft
Excel
A-6. Describe behavior and environment in observable and measurable terms.
In order to describe behavior is observable and measurable terms, follow these guidelines:
Behavior is anything a person does that can be observed, repeated, or measured.
Environment is anything that we perceive through the senses.
A good rule of thumb is to always describe a behavior and/or environment so that someone
completely unfamiliar with the case would be able to take over data collection just by reading the
description.
If I were writing a description of a tantrum behavior, these examples show the difference
between a subjective description and an observable andmeasurable description.
Subjective Observable and Measurable
Getting extremely worked up and frustrated,
yelling or cryingAny incident of kicking legs, throwing self on
ground, banging head on floor, crying that
lasts at least 1 minute


