C-1. Identify the essential components of a written skill acquisition plan.
1. Identify skill deficit
2. Create a goal to address deficit
3. Identify measurement procedures.
4. Access current skill level (baseline).
5. Select and implement skill acquisition procedure(s).
6. Take data of target behaviors to determine effectiveness.
7. Modify if necessary to maintain/increase effectiveness.
C-2. Prepare for the session as required by the skill acquisition plan.
1. Determine what occurred last session to decide where to start.
2. Select skill acquisition procedures to complete during the session
3. Prepare materials you will need for the skill acquisition procedure (including data
collection materials).
C-3. Use contingencies of reinforcement.
Unconditioned reinforcement - Inherent and naturally occurring reinforcement, such as food.
Conditioned reinforcement - Previously neutral stimuli that has become a reinforcer through
association with an established reinforcer.
Continuous reinforcement (CRF) - Reinforcement is provided for each occurrence of behavior,
typically used int he initial stages of learning a new behavior.
Intermittent reinforcement (INT) - Some but not all occurrences of a behavior are reinforced,
typically used to maintain established behaviors and when progressing toward naturally
occurring reinforcement.
Fixed Ratio (FR) - Reinforce every nth response.
Variable Ratio (VR) - Reinforce roughly every nth response.
Fixed Interval (FI) - Reinforce after namount of time
Variable Interval (VI) - Reinforce roughly after namount of time
C-4. Implement discrete-trial teaching procedures.
Mass trial - Asking the target multiple times in a repetitive manner. That would look like this:
<Trial 1: Touch dog  Trial 2: Touch dog  Trial 3: Touch dog=. Mass trialing is typically used
to teach very young children, children new to ABA, or lower functioning children.


Distractor trial - Asking the same target each trial, but including two 8unknown9 choices as
answer options. For example, having a dog card and two cards with objects that are unknown to
the learner and saying <touch dog.=
Random Rotation - This is a trial that includes one mastered choice and one trail choice. You
would rotate prompts during each trial.
Expanded Trial - Similar to the random rotation, but you include several mastered choices and
only one trial choice. You would rotate prompts with each trial.
Maintenance/Generalization - Once a trial choice has been mastered, you would include it in
the rotation of mastered choices during random rotation and expanded trials.
C-5. Implement naturalistic teaching procedures.
Naturalistic teaching procedures are used to help learners generalize the skills they are learning
through their ABA program. You are using the natural environment to generalize learned skills
into natural, everyday use.
An example of implementing naturalistic teaching procedures would be to put a desirable item in
clear view of a learner to encourage manding.
If a learner can identify and tact a picture of a dog, bringing them in the presence of a real dog
and asking <What is it?= would be another example.
C-6. Implement task analyzed chaining procedures.
Task analysis - Breaking complex skills into smaller, teachable units creating sequential steps.
Forward Chaining - Teach the first step of a task, then the second, then the third, until the entire
sequence is mastered.
Backward Chaining - Complete a task entirely except for the last step. Teach the learner to
complete the last step. Once they have mastered the last step, complete the whole task until the
second to last step, and then allow them to master that. Continue this process until the entire task
is learned.
C-7. Implement discrimination training.
Discrimination Training - Discrimination training is teaching a client how to tell the difference
between two or more stimuli. Reinforcing occurrences of a behavior in the presence of one
stimulus condition and not in the presence of another stimulus condition.


Simultaneous - Both stimuli are presented at once.
Successive - Only one stimulus condition is present.
C-8. Implement stimulus control transfer procedures.
Stimulus control transfer procedures are techniques in which prompts are discontinued once the
target behavior is being displayed in the presence of the discriminative stimulus (Sd). Prompt
fading and prompt delay are used in stimulus control transfer procedures.
Example :
RBT: <Say cup=
Learner: <Cup=
RBT: Points to a picture of a cup
Learner: <Cup=
C-9. Implement prompt and prompt fading procedures.
Prompt fading - there are two methods to fade a prompt.
 Most to least - With this method you start the most intrusive prompts and gradually fade
to less intrusive prompts. You might follow a prompting hierarchy such as: Full physical,
partial physical, model, verbal, gestural, independent.
 Least to most - The method involves starting with the least intrusive prompts and
moving up in the prompting hierarchy. This can be beneficial because it gives students
the opportunity to be independent and you are only providing as much prompting as
needed. This is a strategy we tend to use naturally. Once you introduce a task, allow wait
time to see how they respond naturally, then you can give a gestural prompt. If this
doesn9t produce a correct response, move up to a verbal, and so on.
C-10. Implement generalization and maintenance procedures.
Generalization - teach learned targets in the natural environment
Examples:
 Teach the word car with many different pictures of different cars
 Having two people teach the same skill
Maintenance - Including mastered item or skill into programs
Examples:
 Discrete trials using random rotation or extended trials


C-11. Implement shaping procedures.
Shaping is the process of teaching a new behavior gradually by rewarding behaviors that
progressively come close to the target behavior. An example of shaping could be:
Target behavior: Jane to complete a full 10-question homework assignment. After probing, she
has not been successful in completing the task independently.
1. Require Jane to turn in a paper with just her name on it. Reward with reinforcement.
2. Require Jane to turn in a paper with one question completed. Provide reinforcement.
3. Require Jane to turn in a paper with two questions completed. Provide reinforcement.
You would continue this process until the child has met the target behavior. This is only one
example of shaping and the method of shaping can be used in many different ways.
C-12. Implement token economy procedures.
Atoken economy is a system of generalized conditioned reinforcers.
The individual whom receives the generalized tokens can save them and exchange for a variety
of backup reinforcers.
Basically, an individual earns generalized reinforcers (stickers, points, tokens ) which can be
exchanged for an actual reward (i.e., break, game, toy, snack).
Conditioned reinforcer - A stimulus that acquired its reinforcing value by being paired with
other reinforcers. Conditioned reinforcers are also called secondary reinforcers or learned
reinforcers and required pairing to understand their value and be positive for <me=. Such as
social, hugs, tickles, activities, etc.
Backup reinforcer - The reinforcer that is paired with a conditioned reinforcer or a generalized
conditioned reinforcer.
An example might be:
Jamie loves to watch Barney videos
She earns tokens on a board for staying seated on the carpet during story time
After earning a predetermined number of tokens she exchanges them for access to Barney
videos.


