The next morning, Coss does not come down for her usual
					morning practice. Hoskowa is asleep in the living room. Coss’s absence reminds
					Kato that one day his life as an accompanist will be over, and he
					will have to go back to being a businessman. As Kato begins to play
					the piano, something surprising happens. Cesar, a young and unexceptional
					terrorist, begins to sing. Everyone is struck silent by his immense
					talent. Coss comes downstairs. She, too, is struck by his voice.
					Cesar clearly hasn’t been trained, and when he is about to hit a
					note Coss fears is too high and hard for him, she quickly stops
					him from singing in order to prevent him from embarrassing himself.

Everyone cries “bravo,” but Cesar, believing he’s made
					a fool of himself, runs outside and climbs up a tree to hide. Coss
					sends Carmen to reassure him, but Cesar refuses to come down. Coss
					asks Carmen if she would ask General Benjamin to allow Coss to go
					outside to speak to Cesar. No hostages have ever been allowed outside. As
					Carmen approaches Benjamin, he smells the lemon shampoo that Coss
					has washed Carmen’s hair with. The lemon reminds him of his childhood
					and his brother. Impetuously, he decides to let not just Coss but
					all the hostages go outside. 

The sensation of being outdoors overwhelms the hostages.
					Coss talks to Cesar, and they agree that she will give him singing
					lessons. Lothar Falken, a hostage who was once a runner, begins
					running circles around the garden. Soon others follow him, enjoying
					the first physical exertion in months.

Mendoza and Iglesias talk about the young terrorist Ishmael, who
					is within earshot. Iglesias says that when the siege is over he wants
					to adopt Ishmael, and Mendoza says he wants to give him a position
					in his company. They sound like they are joking, but the narrator
					says that they are also serious. In their hearts, the men consider
					the orphan Ishmael a son. Ishmael knows he shouldn’t take such joking
					seriously, but in his heart he believes what the men say. Father
					Arguedas, who hears the conversation, thinks that the men shouldn’t
					indulge in such fantasies, but he wishes their fantasies could come
					true.

The morning after Coss and Hosokawa sleep together for
					the first time, a child, Cesar, comes into Coss’s life. While Cesar
					is not truly the product of Coss and Hosokawa’s relationship, Coss
					does adopt him in a figurative sense. She takes him under her wing
					and promises to teach him to sing. 

Cesar’s talent for singing, which has been hidden until
					this point, reinforces the theme that beauty and longing and passion
					exist in everyone. These qualities are easily lost, however, and
					difficult to express in the first place. When they manage to come
					to the surface, as when Cesar sings, it feels like something of
					a miracle.

The final scene of this chapter is one of the most touching
					in the novel. In it, both the possibility of love and the possibility
					of loss seem close at hand. Ishmael, Iglesias, Mendoza, and Father
					Arguedas attempt to remain logical and to protect their own feelings,
					but all of them long to believe that love will conquer all. Their
					illogical optimism induces a feeling of dread. 

The characters’ situation suggests that if we love deeply,
					we open ourselves up to deep suffering. They know this to be true,
					but they can’t rein in their strong affection for each other. The
					opera Rusalka, the music of which makes up the
					centerpiece of Coss’s repertoire, echoes the plight of the characters.
					In Rusalka, a water goddess who loves a human prince
					asks a witch give her human form. But her transformation comes with
					a curse: when her human lover is untrue, she becomes a figure of
					the underworld, and her embrace turns deadly. When her lover repents
					and begs for her love, they embrace with the knowledge that that
					embrace will kill him. In the same way, the captors and captives
					of Bel Canto have transformed, shedding their original
					roles in order to love one another. In this chapter, Patchett hints
					that their transformations will lead to unhappiness.

