In the middle of November, the garua, or
					heavy fog, lifts, and everything seems bright. The generals clip
					out articles about the hostage situation from the newspapers, but
					the hostages have heard snippets on the TV news about a tunnel being
					dug underground to free them. The idea of a tunnel seems so far-fetched
					that no one believes it. 

Coss sings with even greater beauty and intensity than
					she did before she became a hostage. She sings “as if she [is] saving
					the life of every person in the room.”

Watanabe and Carmen continue to meet in the china closet. Watanabe
					thinks about how wonderful and absurd it is that he has fallen in
					love with a woman not from one of the many big cities that he has
					visited, but from a village in the jungle. He marvels at the fact that
					his love dresses in army fatigues, carries a gun, and has taken him
					hostage.

 	One day Watanabe and Carmen are talking in the bathroom. Carmen
					suggests that they forget about the outside world and make this
					their home. Just then, Watanabe hears Fyodorov calling him and steps
					out of the bathroom to see what he wants. Fyodorov has finally summoned
					up his courage to declare his love for Coss. Watanabe doesn’t know
					about Fyodorov’s love, and he is reluctant to leave Carmen. But
					he agrees and sneaks back to tell Carmen he has to go. Before he
					leaves, Watanabe says that of course the siege will end. Carmen
					sheds a few tears, and Watanabe and Carmen kiss for the first time.

Watanabe and Fyodorov go to talk to Coss. Fyodorov is
					so nervous that he has to sit down. Nonetheless, he manages to give
					an eloquent speech. He begins to explain how moved he was by opera when
					he was a university student. Then he backs up and tells Coss about
					the precious art book his grandmother had. She would pull it out
					in the evenings and show her children and grandchildren how to appreciate
					beauty. In contrast to the struggles of most people living in the
					Soviet Union, the beauty of these paintings was overwhelming. Fyodorov
					tells Coss that he loves her, but he expects nothing in return.
					He just wanted to tell her. “Some people are born to make great
					art and others are born to appreciate it. Don’t you think?” he asks.

Coss thanks him. Watanabe felt awkward during Fyodorov’s speech,
					but he notices that Coss doesn’t seem uncomfortable. He realizes
					that people have probably fallen in love with her throughout her
					life. 

The chapter ends with Cesar, one of the young terrorists,
					thinking about wanting to make love to Coss. Like all the other
					young terrorist boys, he gets an erection when he hears her sing.
					But Cesar thinks that it’s not just Coss he wants to make love to,
					but the music itself.

In much of literature, the lifting of fog symbolizes the
					end of hard times. In Bel Canto, the lifting of
					fog symbolizes the end of the characters’ total isolation. The literal
					cocoon that has surrounded the vice president’s mansion is gone,
					and the outside world is close at hand. One kind of exposure is
					quickly followed by another: right after the fog lifts, we learn
					about the tunnel the government is purportedly digging to the mansion.
					The characters, unwilling to face the possibility that their idyll
					will soon end, decide to ignore the rumors of a tunnel. 

For Carmen and Watanabe, the possibility that the hostage
					situation will end is an inducement to speed up their relationship.
					They kiss for the first time not when they are talking about happy
					plans for their future together, but when they are discussing the
					likelihood that their time together will come to an end. Their fear
					that they will soon lose each other intensifies their feelings.

Fyodorov declares his love to Coss without hoping she
					will return his feelings. Fyodorov is a faintly foolish man, sweaty
					and nervous, and his protestations of love are something of a burden
					to Coss. Nonetheless, he overcomes his anxiety to tell a moving,
					eloquent story about how he came to love beauty. He also makes a strong
					case that Coss should respect those who can appreciate her singing.
					Some, like Coss, can express their passion publicly; others, like
					Kato, express it in secret; others, like Fyodor, cannot express
					it at all. They are the audience, and they rely on performers to
					express beauty and suffering for them. But, Fyodorov says, their
					reliance on performers does not mean that they do not feel the same
					intensity or are not moved by love and loss just as the artist is. 

Patchett has said that art is created in the interaction
					between the artist and the audience. This idea is an important theme
					in the novel. Coss’s singing is made more important because people
					listen to it and are changed by it. Without them, it wouldn’t mean
					much. In this chapter, Patchett acknowledges that the gifted are
					not only those who make great art but also those who appreciate
					it. In the same way, love grows from both the lover and the beloved.
					Thibault loves his wife because of who she is, but also because
					of what he feels at particular moments, and how his experiences
					shape him. 

Coss’s patience with Fyodorov’s declaration of love contrasts with
					her early irritation with her besotted accompanist. Captivity has
					made her more appreciative of her admirers. Another change in Coss
					is evident when she tells Watanabe that it is flattering to be loved
					for what you can do, but better to be loved for who you are. She
					is referring to Hosokawa with these comments; he is the unnamed
					man who loves her for who she is, instead of for her talent. 

