An eleven-year-old Dinka boy from the village of Louri-Ariik in Southern Sudan and one of the story’s two protagonists. Salva is caught up in the violence ravaging Sudan and must flee his village, not knowing the whereabouts of his family. Instead of being overcome with despair, Salva has hope that he can survive and someday see his family again. No longer able to go to school, every experience on his arduous journey becomes a life lesson in perseverance, determination, and refusing to give up. His journey of survival takes him halfway around the world, and he returns to Sudan as a grown man, to bring aid in the form of clean water to his country.

Read an in-depth analysis of Salva.

An eleven-year-old Nuer girl from Southern Sudan and one of the story’s two protagonists. Nya is responsible for fetching water for her family every day, either by traveling a half-day’s journey to and from the pond or by digging for water in the lake where her family camps during the dry season. Nya accepts her lot in life willingly because she has never known any other way. She is resourceful and a role model for her younger sister. Though her daily routine seldom changes, she is a keen observer of life around her. Her life will change nearly completely after men come to her village and drill a well.

Read an in-depth analysis of Nya.

The younger brother of Salva’s father and the only family tie that Salva has while fleeing to Ethiopia. Uncle joins Salva’s group of refugees and they look upon him as a leader. Uncle has a “can do” and “in charge” attitude that the others respect. He takes Salva under his wing, protecting and providing for him, and instilling hope and perseverance in him by encouraging him to take one step at a time. Salva learns about leadership by watching Uncle. Eventually, Uncle is killed by members of the Nuer tribe, but his spirit and determination live on in Salva.

Read an in-depth analysis of Uncle Jewiir

A Dinka boy who is also fleeing the violence and becomes Salva’s companion and friend. He and Salva suffer together but also share moments of childlike playfulness. Marial shares his hope with Salva that they will find their families even if they have to go around the world and back to do so. Marial’s death is a devastating blow to Salva.

An elderly Dinka woman. She is generous to Salva, giving him peanuts and allowing him to sleep in her barn. Salva fetches water for her from her pond, but fearing he will draw the attention of soldiers, she doesn’t allow him to travel with her. However, extending what help she feels she can, she arranges for the Dinkas who appear near her home to take Salva with them. She generously gives Salva more peanuts and an empty gourd for his journey.

The mother of Nya, Akeer, and Nya’s baby brother. She cares for Nya’s baby brother and younger sister while Nya goes back and forth to the pond every day. She fears for the health of her youngest daughter, lives in terror of Dinka tribesmen, and has no idea how the family will have enough water to drink once they boil it to kill the germs. She instills a sense of responsibility and duty in her children.

Nya’s five-year-old sister whom Nya teaches to fetch water. She, too, must take on the responsibility of helping her family. She becomes ill from drinking contaminated water. Nya and her mother travel with a weakened Akeer several days to a health clinic where they obtain life-saving medicine for her.

Nya’s older brother who hunts with their father, and wonders, as Nya does, how water could ever come forth from the dry earth in their village. Dep explains to Nya what she observes happening as work on the well progresses.

A provider for Nya’s family. He helps coordinate the villagers’ responsibilities for the well project and tells Nya that she will be able to go to the school the village can now build.

An infant who stays with Nya’s mother. Nya’s mother cares for him while Nya walks back and forth to the pond and puts him on her back to carry rocks for gravel needed to build the well.

Salva’s father, a respected man in the village who owns the cattle Salva and his brothers herd to water. He is overcome with joy when Salva, many years after fleeing from Sudan, discovers that his father is still alive and returns to Sudan to find him.

A boy from the Jur-chol tribe who walks with Salva and leads the group to the beehive and its honey.

An aid worker from Ireland in the refugee camp in Kenya where Salva is. He befriends Salva, teaches him English and how to play volleyball, and supports Salva who anxiously waits for his name to appear on the list at the camp administrator’s office.

Salva’s mother, who often wears a bright orange scarf. Salva learns at a later point that she is still alive.

Salva’s adoptive father and mother in the United States.

A friend of Chris and Louise who coordinates non-profit projects. He shares his knowledge with Salva and helps in the planning of Salva’s project.

