Much of Reverend Hightower’s characterization centers
				around his quirky if not obsessive fixation on his grandfather’s
				Confederate cavalry unit. Though the dust and thundering charge
				of the unit have long dispelled, the hoofbeats and clamor still
				echo in Hightower’s memory. They serve as a powerful reminder of
				humans’ uneasy relationship with the past—its burden and ubiquitous
				presence. Through the figure of Hightower, the past becomes a living entity
				that is never escaped or left behind. Nor are its hard-won lessons
				always heeded, as violence and racial divide grip Jefferson and its
				environs almost as profoundly as in the days of the Civil War. Hightower’s
				life stands as a grim reminder of the fact that, for many, there
				is no fresh start, no hope for a new direction or change. His wife’s
				erratic behavior and subsequent suicide trigger a process of gradual
				decline, as Hightower bears the guilt and stigma of the scandal.
				He punishes himself—and the community at large at the same time—by
				refusing to admit total defeat in leaving town after he has been
				stripped of his duties.

In light of personal setback and unexpected disappointment, Hightower’s
				life stands as a testament to the recovery and reassertion of dignity
				and personal pride. Pride takes on a double meaning in Hightower’s
				tangled stream-of-consciousness musings. He attempts to reclaim
				the pride of self, his self-respect and self-esteem, while resisting
				vanity, a proud resistance against the vicious gossip and rumors
				that course through the community. In his musings and ruminations,
				Hightower stands as the moral or philosophical center of the novel.
				In the midst of the tragedy and ill circumstances that have marked
				his life, he is able to salvage greater strength, self-awareness,
				and wisdom. Along the way, he is also able to confront and lay to
				rest the family ghosts and the legacy of the painful past that haunts
				him still.

