Richard’s simplicity and steadfastness have enabled him
				to build a stable life for Clarissa, but these same qualities represent
				the compromise that marrying him required. Richard is a simple,
				hardworking, sensible husband who loves Clarissa and their daughter, Elizabeth.
				However, he will never share Clarissa’s desire to truly and fully
				communicate, and he cannot appreciate the beauty of life in the same
				way she can. At one point, Richard tries to overcome his habitual
				stiffness and shyness by planning to tell Clarissa that he loves her,
				but he is ultimately too repressed to say the words, in part because
				it has been so long since he last said them. Just as he does not understand
				Clarissa’s desires, he does not recognize Elizabeth’s potential
				as a woman. If he had had a son, he would have encouraged him to
				work, but he does not offer the same encouragement to Elizabeth,
				even as she contemplates job options. His reticence on the matter
				increases the likelihood that she will eventually be in the same
				predicament as Clarissa, unable to support herself through a career
				and thus unable to gain the freedom to follow her passions. 

Richard considers tradition of prime importance, rather
				than passion or open communication. He champions the traditions England
				went to war to preserve, in contrast to Septimus, and does not recognize
				their destructive power. Despite his occasional misgivings, Richard
				has close associations with members of English high society. He
				is critical of Hugh, but they revere many of the same symbols, including
				the figure of the grand old lady with money, who is helpless when
				it comes to surviving in a patriarchal society. Richard likes the
				fact that women need him, but sometimes he wrongly assumes they
				do. For example, he does not recognize that a female vagrant may
				not want his help but may instead enjoy living outside the
				rules of his society. For Richard, this sort of freedom is unimaginable. 

