James has terrible dreams after returning to the clinic
					and seeing Lilly taken back into the detox unit. He goes to see
					Lincoln, who tells him that James’s behavior while retrieving Lilly
					is something he has never seen before. He also says that Lilly is
					doing okay but that her grandmother will need to pay for another
					term at the clinic. Ken and James meet with Randall, the clinic
					attorney, who delivers the news that James’s sentence in Ohio has
					been reduced to three months in a county jail and three years probation.
					Ken tells him that it’s also time for him to run through steps four
					and five of the program, which involve writing down an inventory
					of his misdeeds. Step five is admitting to yourself, to God, and
					another human being the exact content of the inventory. The clinic
					has an experienced priest who normally assists in this step. James
					is wary, but he agrees.

Back in the unit James notices that there is a new man
					who has tattoos and a fetid, rotting odor. The man is missing one
					arm and the other is missing from the elbow down. James goes back
					to him room and reads the Tao. Miles comes in and
					tells James that things have not been going well with his wife.
					James gives him a hug and holds him. Back in the lounge, Leonard
					makes an announcement: he has been told that he is free to leave
					the clinic the next day, so he has arranged for a lobster and steak
					dinner and cable television to watch the boxing match. The unit
					erupts with joy. At the dinner, James tries to help the new man
					with no arms get some food but is rudely rebuffed. James gets his
					own food and sits with Leonard and watches the fight. The night
					is so enjoyable that none of the men want to go to bed.

James has a new job the next day. It is “greeter.” He
					sits with his friends at their usual table and notices that there
					is someone new sitting by himself at the end of the table. His new
					job dictates that he greet the person, so he does. The man is named
					Michael and he is brusque at first. Michael tells his story of addiction
					and shame, and everyone at the table laughs at him. He is upset,
					but when everyone else tells him their stories, he realizes that
					they are all laughing with him and not at him. Joanne and James
					meet to talk about James’s discharge. Pending his successful completion
					of the final steps of the program, he may leave the day after tomorrow.
					Leonard is preparing to leave, but before going he gives James all
					of his contact information. Leonard has two other pieces of news.
					First, he’s paid for the rest of Lilly’s stay at the clinic. Second,
					he’d like to take James on as the son he’s never had. James agrees.

After Leonard’s dramatic departure, James goes to lunch.
					He meets Miles, who tells him that his wife is going to come to
					the Family Program. James calls his brother Bob and asks if he can
					stay with him for a little while. He gets a pad and a pen and goes
					outside to work on his inventory of himself, which ends up at an
					impressive twenty-two pages. After reading it over, he indicates
					that there is one more thing he must confess, but that he has not
					written it down on the list.

As James’s stay in the clinic ends, new patients are being
					admitted who serve as markers of his progress. The first is a truly
					terrifying specter—a rotting husk of a human being. The man is physically injured,
					silent, and disgusting. Basically, he is much like James must have
					been on admission, even down to refusing help with his dinner. It
					wouldn’t be too off the mark to say this man is like a ghost (he even
					smells like he is dying), a physical reminder to James of what he was,
					and what he will be if he goes back to his old ways. The second new
					person is Michael, who, like the Bald Man, tells his story only to
					find the men responding in laughter. The difference this time, however,
					is that the laughter is much more genial. There is a sense of camaraderie
					now that was not so apparent before. Also, we see that James can
					finally focus on someone other than himself. He tries to help these
					two men. On the telephone with his parents, he takes the time to
					ask how they are. The profound selfishness that
					marked James’s early days in the clinic is starting to subside.
					Other people now matter.

In the dinner scene, we see this calmer, more relaxed
					James at his best, and we see that his former behaviors are not
					unique to him. When presented with a nice meal, the men in the unit
					slip into extremely odd and somewhat repulsive eating habits. They
					cram whole lobster tails into their mouths, eat with their fingers,
					and rip at porterhouse steak with their teeth. James is reminded
					of his own first few days at the clinic, when he ate with his fingers
					and stuffed himself to the point of vomiting. This is the nature
					of addiction. The hunger, the need, the greed—these things are lessening
					for James. He now eats like a normal human being. He savors every
					bite and tastes the food. The dinner scene also marks the second
					time that Leonard has commanded the evening and brought some life
					and joy into the world of the clinic. Leonard’s influence is tremendous,
					and he offers the most valuable thing possible: hope. Though he
					eats as messily as the other men, he remains a deeply civilizing
					force.

James has taken several inventories of himself through
					the course of the book. Early on, he creates a mock obituary, which
					is dreadfully depressing and belies just how sorry James felt for
					himself when he first arrived. Throughout the book, he has listed
					and tallied various drugs taken and offenses committed. But now
					he is faced with the task of completing a formal, public declaration
					of his sins. Moreover, he is being asked to give this quasi-confession
					to a priest. Having no faith in God or the Twelve Step program,
					this is a lot to ask. Amazingly, James agrees, largely because this
					task is in tune with his principles of honesty and personal responsibilities.
					He throws himself into the task with characteristic zeal, cranking
					out twenty-two pages. At the end of the process, he hits a wall
					of sorts. There is one thing that he feels he cannot yet let go
					of, one thing he has not yet mentioned. Whatever it is, it’s too
					horrible for him to write down. When he looks at his reflection
					and thinks about the unnamed event, his pale green eyes (something
					he worked so hard to be able to look at directly) now appear dirty
					green. It seems clear that once this last thing is faced, James
					will be free. We do not know, however, whether he can successfully
					face it.

