After midnight, two nights before the fire and the murder,
					Joe Christmas is in bed, unable to sleep. Joe Brown stumbles into
					the cabin the two men share, drunk and laughing. Annoyed by the
					rowdiness, Christmas holds Brown still and hits him repeatedly.
					Brown casts racial slurs at Christmas but eventually quiets and
					settles into a deep sleep.

Christmas, still unable to sleep, focuses his anger on
					Miss Burden. He feels he can forgive the fact that she lied to him
					about her age, but he cannot excuse the fact that she prayed over
					him. As his anger gets the best of him, he curses Miss Burden and
					goes outside, wandering the darkened yard. He takes off his clothes
					and stands by the road; when a car goes by and a woman screams,
					he screams back at the car. Finally, he goes to the stable and manages
					to sleep there for two hours.

At seven o’clock in the morning, Christmas goes to a clearing, where
					he shaves, reads a magazine, and then unearths a cache of metal
					tins, pouring the whiskey they contain onto the ground. He then
					put the tins back where they were originally. That evening, he eats
					dinner in a restaurant, stares coldly at Brown being shaved at the
					barbershop, and wanders around town desperately. He eventually passes
					through the predominantly black part of town, then the white neighborhood,
					then the woods and trails outside of town. He confronts a group
					of blacks on the road and, after they leave, realizes that he is
					holding a razor in his open hand. He goes toward Miss Burden’s and
					sits in the yard in the dark. When he hears the clock strike twelve,
					he enters the house, thinking, Something is going to happen.
						Something is going to happen to me.

The action then shifts to when Joe Christmas is five years
					old. Living in an orphanage, he sneaks into the dietician’s room
					to steal some of her toothpaste. Suddenly, the dietician enters
					the room with a young male doctor, and Joe hides behind a curtain.
					The dietician and the man begin to make love, and Joe, sick from
					eating too much toothpaste, suddenly vomits loudly and is discovered.
					The angry dietician handles him roughly, hissing a racial slur at
					him in the process.

After the incident, the dietician becomes paranoid that
					the boy will tell the director of the facility what he saw. She
					tries to bribe him with a silver dollar to keep quiet, but he is
					too young to comprehend what has happened and does not accept the
					money. The dietician then approaches the orphanage janitor, who
					confirms her suspicion that the child is biracial. However, he refuses
					to help the dietician reveal that fact to matron, as it would result
					in the boy’s removal and transfer to an orphanage for black children.

Later, the janitor appears at the dietician’s door, asking
					her what she plans to do and whether she is going to reveal the
					boy’s parentage to the matron. When he realizes her intentions,
					the janitor disappears with the child, only to be taken into custody
					several days later in Little Rock. The child is returned to the
					orphanage and, with the dietician’s intervention, is quickly adopted
					by a stern, unemotional, devoutly religious farmer, Mr. McEachern.
					The matron tells McEachern that the nurses found the boy on Christmas
					Eve, but McEachern says that Christmas is a heathen name and that
					from now on, the young boy will be known as Joe McEachern.

In telling the backstory of Joe Christmas, Faulkner continues
					to explore the notion of a fluid, unstable, indeterminate identity. Christmas
					is literally a man without a name, as his cartoonish surname derives
					merely from the fact that he was left on the steps of the Memphis
					orphanage at Christmas. His unknown parentage and ambiguous racial
					heritage condemn him to a life as a shadow figure. He is a man who
					walks on the edges of society, just as he restlessly and silently
					wanders the streets of Jefferson, passing unnoticed through the
					black and white neighborhoods alike, a stranger to both realms and
					accepted fully by neither. At times mistaken for a foreigner, Christmas
					is variously tagged as being either white or black—absolute distinctions
					that deny his essential nature as a biracial man, a person with
					roots in both worlds.

Although Faulkner often shows us that competing interpretations
					and perspectives can reveal new truths, we see that they can also
					result in misunderstandings and pave the way for tragic events. When
					the five-year-old Christmas is caught behind a screen in the dietician’s
					room, a black comedy of misinterpreted intentions and mistaken impressions
					ensues. The dietician fears that Joe will tell the matron about
					her tryst, but the child is unaware of what really happened and
					fears only that his petty thievery of toothpaste will be exposed.
					The chain of misunderstandings that is unleashed results in Joe’s
					forced removal by the orphanage’s custodian and, ultimately, his
					adoption by the McEacherns—all orchestrated by the anxious dietician,
					who willfully exposes Joe’s mixed racial heritage.

The sudden jump to Joe Christmas’s childhood is typical
					of the nonlinear structure of Light in August.
					Just as perceptions are fluid and ever-shifting in the novel, so
					is the conception of time. Faulkner’s authorial eye darts forward
					and backward in time, often presenting a scenario from one character’s
					point of view and then revisiting the same incident from an alternate
					perspective. This technique reinforces Faulkner’s notion that there
					is no one solitary or ultimate version of the truth. Although the
					novel’s focus is planted firmly in Jefferson during a brief but
					tumultuous time in August, Faulkner examines the past with equal
					scrutiny, presenting the complex influences that have come together
					to form the character of Joe Christmas.

The episode from Christmas’s childhood elucidates the
					present, portraying a seminal event that casts long shadows into
					the future. Perhaps most important, it serves as an early and stinging
					lesson in racism for the young protagonist. At the same time, the
					episode is completely isolated from the main current of Faulkner’s
					tale, taking on the qualities of a dark, Gothic fairy tale. Nameless
					and mysterious figures—the matron, the janitor, the dietician (revealed
					to be named Miss Atkins only at the episode’s end)—populate a classic setting
					of childhood deprivation and abuse: the orphanage. A kidnapping
					takes place, and ultimately Joe is taken off to a remote homestead
					with an emotionally distant foster father. Interwoven with the dietician’s
					and janitor’s oblique references to sin and expiation, the chapter
					assumes the quality of a dream, approximating the dim memories,
					half-impressions, and limited comprehension of a five-year-old child.

Ultimately, Faulkner’s portrait of Joe’s formative years
					serves to complicate the moral questions of his tale. As more information
					is revealed about Joe’s childhood, we begin to wonder whether Joe’s violent,
					brooding nature was predisposed or whether his abusive treatment
					as a child unleashed a tragic chain of causation. For the most part,
					Faulkner leaves this question provocatively unresolved.

