A thousand questions pushed through my
						mind, but the Voice within me did not answer. There was only silence.

On Easter Sunday, Antonio takes his first Communion and
					waits for God to answer the questions that haunt him. However, only
					silence rings inside his head.

Antonio continues to attend confession and Communion,
					but the answers still do not come. The boys from town begin to have
					gang fights with the boys from Los Jaros. Antonio, who lives between
					the town and Los Jaros, is caught in the middle. On the last day
					of school, Antonio calls to Vitamin Kid to race him across the bridge. However,
					the Vitamin Kid is walking with a girl named Ida, and he expresses
					no interest in racing.

	There is a rumor that Tenorio’s sick daughter is near
					death. Téllez, a rancher from Agua Negra, comes to Ultima to ask
					help in lifting a curse on his home. Pots and pans fly across the
					room in his home. Stones rain from the sky. A priest has blessed
					their house, but the blessing has not been effective. Antonio wonders
					how an almighty God has again failed to dispel evil. Ultima states
					that many years ago, Téllez’s grandfather hanged three Comanches
					for raiding his flocks. The curse has awakened the ghosts to force
					them to do wrong. Gabriel accepts responsibility for interfering
					with destiny if Ultima helps his friends.

	Gabriel and Antonio accompany Ultima to Agua
					Negra. Antonio realizes that María teaches him that every man is
					tied to the earth in his need for nourishment and security, but
					Ultima and Gabriel teach him that the land serves a more spiritual
					function: immortality comes from freedom, and freedom is nourished by
					the land, air, and sea.

	When they arrive, Ultima instructs Antonio and Gabriel
					to build a platform in the yard and to cover it with juniper branches.
					Ultima asks Gabriel to place three bundles on the platform and set
					it all on fire. Gabriel informs Antonio that his father once told
					him that the Comanche burned their dead on platforms like this.
					When the platform is burned completely, Ultima declares that the
					curse is lifted. Téllez mentions that a month earlier he challenged
					Tenorio for speaking badly of Ultima. Soon thereafter, the evil
					things began to occur in his home.

	That night, Antonio dreams that his brothers call for
					him to give them rest from their restless sea-blood. Antonio replies
					that he cannot help them. He baits his hook with their livers and
					begins to fish in the river. They continue to cry out, so he unbaits
					his hook and throws their livers into the River of the Carp. Finally,
					they rest.

Antonio and Cico decide the time is right to take Florence
					to see the golden carp. Antonio confesses his doubts about the God
					of the Catholic Church. Cico explains that there are many gods,
					and that Antonio’s god is jealous. Antonio will have to choose between
					the carp and the God of the Church. They find their friends waving excitedly
					at them next to the shores of the Blue Lake in the section where
					swimming is forbidden. Horse shouts that Florence hasn’t emerged
					from the water. Just as Cico prepares to dive for Florence, Florence’s
					body floats to the surface. Antonio prays the Act of Contrition
					over Florence’s body but despairs that it is useless because Florence
					never believed. When the lifeguards finally arrive, Horse and the
					others lie and say they tried to persuade Florence not to swim in
					the forbidden area. Sickened, Antonio runs along the river.

Antonio’s intensified religious doubts illustrate the
					extent to which he had pegged his hope for moral understanding on
					a miraculous epiphany during his Communion. His disillusionment
					indicates the degree to which Antonio is still a child, even if
					he is an unusually thoughtful and morally curious one. It is naïve,
					of course, for him to think that the act of receiving Communion
					might revolutionize his moral understanding of the world, but his
					power of understanding and belief is still so strong that he is
					able to convince himself completely. However, his childlike faith
					takes a blow after his disappointment. After repeated failures to
					receive God’s explanation of the existence of evil, Antonio even
					ventures the thought that God himself does not exist. His faith
					in God is further challenged when Ultima is able to lift the curse
					on Téllez’s home, an act a priest failed spectacularly to accomplish.

	The novel describes the process of entering adolescence
					as involving a loss that is to be mourned, but to which children
					must resign themselves. Antonio senses that his friends are also
					undergoing a lot of change, and this section begins to dramatize
					the turmoil of adolescence, symbolizing the fact that Antonio really
					is growing up. Like all the book’s depicted life changes, adolescence
					brings a share of loss and regret, as we see when the Vitamin Kid
					does not want to race anymore and when Antonio mourns the loss of
					“something good.” Nevertheless, he accepts the changes
					in his friends and his relationship with them as inevitable, indicating
					his broad perspective and his courageous determination to adapt
					to the changes he faces.

	Antonio’s despair of understanding why evil exists actually
					leads him to greater spiritual understanding. As a result of his
					failed religious inquiry, Antonio finds a sort of peace in his spiritual
					relationship with the land and nature. He owes his multifaceted appreciation
					of these things to the different influences of his mother, his father,
					and Ultima. Antonio has finally achieved a kind of harmony regarding
					his radically different heritages. His ability to enjoy peacefully
					the land’s beauty provides him with respite from the unanswerable
					question of evil. He also finds respite in the multiplicity of religious
					traditions: at the moment his confidence in Catholicism wanes to
					almost nothing, Antonio begins going again with Cico to wait for
					the golden carp. While watching the golden carp, Antonio achieves
					a sense of peace that Catholicism does not give him. The golden
					carp allows him to appreciate the beauty of the moment, soothing
					his constant anxiety regarding the existence of evil; the power
					of the carp to soothe him indicates that, as Ultima believes, the
					idea of a religious tradition is not an all-or-nothing principle.
					It is possible to appreciate the truths that lie within a tradition
					of Catholicism without being utterly devastated when they prove
					incomplete, because there are other traditions in the world, and
					each can answer questions that the others leave blank.

	 Antonio assumes the role of a priest for the third time,
					and this time signals his final loss of hope in the Catholic church.
					Tragically, Florence dies just before Antonio and Cico can initiate
					him into the religion of the golden carp. In this scene, Antonio
					performs as a priest by reciting the Act of Final Contrition for
					Florence, but he has no sense of hope while he does so. In addition
					to the tragedy of seeing a friend die, Antonio is also exposed to
					the nastier side of human moral weakness when the lifeguard on duty
					yells at the boys for ruining his “perfect record.”

