Rayona is the product of generations of struggle and misunderstanding,
				and her coming-of-age is made especially difficult by the problems
				that have plagued her family since Ida first agreed to pose as Christine’s
				mother. Much of Rayona’s past is kept from her by her mother, Christine,
				and by Ida. However, Rayona is not aware of this secrecy so she
				does not know to look behind it or to seek to understand why her
				mother and presumed grandmother behave so strangely toward her.
				For this reason, she takes their actions at face value, often grossly
				misunderstanding them. Most of the time, Rayona’s innate alertness
				and capacity for acute observation cause her to draw conclusions
				about people based solely on their actions and without taking their
				situations into account. To some extent, the novel can be seen as
				an argument against this highly literal way of perceiving the world.

	Rayona is constantly trying to find her place and identity
				in the world, a task made especially difficult by her lack of information regarding
				her heritage. Since she has so little sense of self, Rayona often
				forms opinions of herself based on the way she thinks others see
				her: “[t]oo big, too smart, not Black, not Indian, not friendly.” Rayona
				longs to be normal, to fit in, and especially to find a less dysfunctional
				family life. The family Rayona sees described in the letter she
				finds at Bearpaw Lake becomes her ideal. Rayona feels that a family
				should be the one place where she is always welcome, and it takes
				her most of the novel to realize that hers is one of those families
				after all.

	Despite Rayona’s disappointments and frustrations, her
				story ends on an optimistic note and she emerges as the future of
				her family. When Ida begins her story, she explains that she may
				one day tell it to Rayona, “who might understand.” Rayona is therefore
				one of the few characters in the novel who may have the opportunity
				both to understand her past and to take control of her future. If
				any character in the novel can finally break from the bonds of secrecy,
				shame, guilt, and misunderstanding, it is Rayona.

