Six weeks later, back in New York, the social circle attends
the funeral of Mrs. Peniston, who died suddenly. Her will declares
that most of her estate be left to Jack Stepney, her already-wealthy nephew.
Lily is snubbed, receiving only $10,000,
while the remainder of the estate is left to Grace Stepney. Lily,
despite feeling cheated, is happy overall because the money will
pay off virtually all her debt to Gus Trenor. She learns, however,
that she will not be able to receive the money for a whole year,
meaning that she will remain destitute for quite some time. Meanwhile,
other people in the community gossip that Lily was likely snubbed
when Mrs. Peniston heard that she seduced George Dorset. Lily begins
to fear that she will be rejected from all of society, a fear confirmed
by Gerty Farish's assertion that Bertha Dorset, as a high-ranking
member of society, will be held a more credible source of information
than Lily. To her dismay, Lily realizes that Gerty is her only remaining
friend.

We learn that after she was kicked off the yacht, Lily
went to England for a short stay, but Selden convinced her to return
to America. She came home to find that her reputation had been totally destroyed.
It is clear that Bertha used Lily to keep George distracted, then
framed Lily to get rid of her. Lily now makes it her goal to regain
her social standing, although this will not be easy. One night, when
she goes out to dinner with Gerty, they meet the Trenors, Carry
Fisher and Simon Rosedale. They speak briefly and awkwardly, which
indicates that Lily is now generally disliked after being discredited.

Meanwhile, Lily is still plagued by her financial troubles.
She feels it morally necessary to repay Trenor, although she cannot
do so for another year. She asks Grace to loan her money, but Grace
flatly refuses, telling Lily she ought to be ashamed of herself
for disgracing herself and, indirectly, Mrs. Peniston. Even Lily's
own family has deserted her.

As she leaves her interview with Grace, Lily bumps into
Carry Fisher, who tries to make amends with her. Carry convinces
Lily to go to the Gormers' party that night, a move that proves
successful because soon afterwards the Gormers invite Lily to go
on vacation with them to Alaska, an invitation which Lily accepts.
Her hope is to stay in Alaska until the New York socialites forgive
her and miss her, a plan which partially works. Lily wins herself
a place in the rising Gormer social circle, which contains some
people who are also in the Dorset/Trenor social circle. Carry also
encourages Lily to marry as soon as possible in order to cement
her social comeback. Carry suggests George, who may get divorced
from Bertha at any time, and also mentions Simon Rosedale. The latter
no longer seems like a bad alternative to Lily, who is becoming
desperate for security in her friends and finances.

Later on, walking around town, Lily meets George, who
apologizes to her for all that has happened. He admits that he has
also been outcast by society, and he needs a friend. Lily tells
him that after the scandal, she can no longer be friends with him
at all. George begs her to help him, saying that only she knows
about the affair between Bertha and Ned Silverton, and so she can
help release him from his failed marriage. However, Lily offers
no help and says she can never see George again.

She returns to the Gormer house and learns that Bertha
stopped by to see her in her absence. Lily suspects that Bertha
is trying to spy with the intent of harming her. She resolves to
spend the winter in a hotel, where she can recoup her finances and
relax for a while. George comes by for a visit to plead his case
once more, but again Lily refuses him. She lies, telling him that
she knows nothing of Bertha and her extramarital affairs, although
we know that she has Bertha's love letters to Selden. Lily asks
George to never return.

