Hamilton draws the story of Perseus from the later writers
					Ovid and Apollodorus, though it was also widely popular among the
					Greeks. One day, the Oracle at Delphi tells King Acrisius of Argos
					that the future son of his daughter, Danaë, will kill him. Though
					Acrisius imprisons Danaë to prevent her from ever getting pregnant,
					Zeus magically enters the prison. Danaë gives birth to a son, Perseus. Acrisius
					locks Danaë and Perseus in a chest and casts it to sea.

Danaë and her son eventually wash up at the home of Dictys,
					a kind fisherman whose brother, Polydectes, is the cruel ruler of
					the area. Polydectes soon wants to get rid of Perseus and marry
					Danaë, so he comes up with a plan to kill the young man: he convinces
					Perseus to go kill Medusa, the horrible Gorgon—an impossible feat
					for a mortal. The gods favor Perseus, however: he receives a mirrored shield
					from Athena, a magic sword from Hermes, and information on the location
					of the nymphs of the North—the only ones who know how to kill the
					Gorgon—from the Graiae, three supernatural gray sisters with only
					one eye among them. Perseus craftily steals the eye the Graiae share
					and refuses to return it until they help him. He eventually reaches
					the mystical land of the Hyperborean nymphs, who give him winged
					sandals that allow him to fly, a wallet that expands to hold anything,
					and a cap that makes its wearer invisible. With these, Hermes’ sword,
					and Athena’s mirrored shield—which enables him to avoid looking
					directly at the Gorgons, which would turns him to stone—he creeps
					into the Gorgons’ cave while they are sleeping. The two gods point
					out Medusa, the only mortal one. While looking at her in the mirror,
					Perseus chops off her head and puts it in the magic wallet, then
					begins to fly home.

Along the way, he comes upon Andromeda, a princess who
					has been chained to a rock because her mother, Cassiopeia, has offended the
					gods. A sea serpent is about to eat Andromeda, but Perseus cuts off
					its head and takes Andromeda as his wife. He returns home to find
					that Polydectes has driven his mother and Dictys into hiding. Perseus
					goes to Polydectes’ palace where all the evil men of the kingdom
					are gathered. He marches into the meeting and reveals Medusa’s head,
					turning all the men to stone. He lives happily ever after but only
					after unwittingly fulfilling the prophecy of the Oracle: while participating
					in a discus-throwing contest, Perseus accidentally hits and kills
					a spectator, who is, unbeknownst to him, his grandfather Acrisius.

Hamilton’s account of Theseus, the greatest hero of Athens,
					again draws upon Apollodorus, but it also stitches together details
					from other writers, some as early as Sophocles. Theseus is the son
					of the Athenian king, Aegeus, but he grows up with his mother in
					the south. Aegeus has left a sword and pair of shoes under a giant
					rock and says that when Theseus gets strong enough to move the rock,
					he is to be sent to Athens. Theseus reaches maturity, rolls the
					rock aside, takes the sword and shoes, and sets out on the journey.
					The dangerous road to Athens is full of bandits, notably Sciron,
					Sinis, and Procrustes, who delight in torturing passersby. Theseus
					kills the bandits in the same methods they have used to kill their
					own victims.

When Theseus arrives in Athens, the evil Medea senselessly
					convinces Aegeus, who does not realize the stranger is his son,
					to kill him. At the last minute, Aegeus sees the sword and recognizes
					the boy. Medea escapes to Asia. Theseus then saves Athens from its obligation
					to King Minos of Crete. After a son of Minos was killed while a
					guest in Aegeus’s household, Minos beat the Athenians in a war,
					and now, as punishment, every nine years the Athenians had to send
					seven girls and seven boys to meet their doom in the Labyrinth of
					the Minotaur. Theseus offers himself as a victim, promising his father
					that if he survives, he will replace his ship’s black sail with
					a white one for the return journey so that Aegeus will be able to
					tell whether his son is alive.

Like Jason, Theseus wins the heart of the enemy king’s
					daughter, Ariadne, who defies Minos and helps Theseus escape the
					Labyrinth with a ball of golden thread that he unwinds as he walks
					so that he can find his way back. Theseus finds the Minotaur asleep,
					beats it to death, and flees to the ship to sail home. Ariadne flees
					with him, and on the way home, he abandons her when she goes ashore
					and a fierce wind blows him out to sea. Ariadne dies, which is perhaps
					what makes Theseus forget to lower the black sail and raise the
					white one. When Aegeus sees the black sail approaching, he commits
					suicide by jumping into the sea then named after him—the Aegean.

Theseus becomes king and makes Athens a democracy. He
					has several minor adventures while king: he helps the Argives after
					the War of the Seven against Thebes, when the Thebans refuse to
					allow the defeated to bury their dead (see Part Five, Chapter II);
					he helps Oedipus and his daughters (same chapter); and prevents
					Hercules from killing himself after his insanity (see Part Three,
					Chapter III). Theseus fights the Amazons twice—once attacking them,
					once defending their attack on Athens—and marries their queen, Hippolyta
					(also called Antiope), who bears him his son Hippolytus. He is one
					of the Argonauts (see Part Two, Chapter III) and a participant in
					the Calydonian Hunt (see Part Three, Chapter IV). He defeats the Centaurs,
					vicious half-men half-horse beasts, after they kill the bride of
					his best friend, Pirithoüs. Theseus helps his friend again, when
					Pirithoüs foolishly decides to pursue Persephone as his next wife.
					Hades outwits them, tricking them into his Chair of Forgetfulness,
					which makes their minds blank and paralyzes them. Hercules rescues
					Theseus, repaying his debt, but Pirithoüs remains there forever.

Theseus’s story becomes tragic. He marries Ariadne’s
					sister, Phaedra, who subsequently falls in love with his son, Hippolytus. Hippolytus
					rejects Phaedra, who kills herself and leaves a suicide note accusing
					Hippolytus of rape. Theseus curses and exiles Hippolytus, who soon
					dies. Artemis reveals the truth to Theseus. He then goes to visit
					his friend, King Lycomedes, who mysteriously kills him.

These two stories reinforce earlier themes about fate
					and the danger of hubris. When King Acrisius tries to alter fate
					by locking Danaë up and casting her out to sea, his actions only
					set the stage for that very fate to be fulfilled. Likewise, when
					Theseus oddly oversteps his place in trying to help Pirithoüs steal
					Persephone, he fails for the first time and needs Hercules’ rescue.
					These myths explicate their moral lessons by showing that correct
					behavior is rewarded but rule-breaking—such as hubris towards the
					gods—is punished.

As Hamilton points out, Perseus’s story almost resembles
					a fairy-tale, with its magic objects and divine intervention. Hermes
					and Athena tell Perseus almost precisely what to do. Aside from
					his wily craftiness with the Graiae, his success is due entirely
					to his sandals, wallet, cap, and sword. Even his motivation is simple,
					driven by self-preservation and a desire for a beautiful wife. Once
					he has won these simple aims, he disappears from our view.

Theseus, on the other hand, has many great achievements,
					and embodies a more highly developed heroism than Perseus. Right from
					the start, he seeks challenges and wins by his own hand, lifting the
					rock his father has placed. Then, in the very act of setting off
					to find his father, he altruistically chooses to better the path
					for other travelers by killing the bandits. Theseus promptly volunteers
					himself as a victim for the Minotaur, out of a sense of kinship
					with the Athenian youth and a desire to end the unfair tribute in
					blood. Though Theseus escapes from the Labyrinth with Ariadne’s
					golden thread, he conquers the Minotaur himself. Never one to rest
					on his laurels, he initiates the institution of democracy, serves
					as a wise judge in disputes, and comes to the aid of justice when
					the rulers of Thebes withhold it from the Argives. His constant
					aim is the impartial and balanced protection of decency and the
					defenseless, and he faces each new challenge with wisdom, gravity,
					and bravery.

Theseus’s story is enduring and deeply culturally rooted,
					especially in his native Athens. Perseus’s tale, in contrast, is
					a straightforward adventure of pure good versus pure evil. Theseus’s
					story is more intricate, human, and realistic. Interestingly, few
					of Theseus’s challenges come from pure evil or malice—even the adventure
					of the Minotaur, which seems a case of simple monstrosity, is more
					complex and with longer roots. The whole tribute of Athenian flesh
					to Minos stems from Aegeus’s earlier wronging of Minos—the death of
					a son entrusted to Aegeus’s hospitality. Theseus is, then, caught
					in a complicated situation that predates him. In this sense, his
					story resembles the great Greek tragedies, which almost universally
					portray heroes or heroines who begin trapped in the complicated
					situations they have inherited, and which force them to make difficult decisions
					through a process of exhaustive soul-searching.

