The deputy in Jefferson informs the sheriff that Lena
					has settled into the cabin on the Burden property, believing that
					it was the house Joe Brown promised he would provide for her and
					the baby. Byron Bunch, meanwhile, is camped out in a tent a short
					distance from the cabin. Concluding that Lena is harming no one,
					the sheriff decides to allow her to stay there.

At three o’clock in the morning, the sheriff is summoned
					by a man who reports that Joe Christmas went on a rampage at a black church
					twenty miles away. Thundering in and disrupting the service, Joe
					assaulted several church members and cursed God from the pulpit.
					The grandson of one of the elder members whom Joe punched rushed
					at Joe with a razor, but Joe knocked him out with a blow to the
					head. After having a cigarette out front in the dark, he ran off.

The posse of men with bloodhounds arrives at the church
					to try to track Joe down. They find a note, consisting solely of
					an expletive, addressed to the sheriff and left in the church. The
					men then go on a chase across the countryside, tracking the fugitive
					to a cabin where he changed shoes with the woman inside. The sheriff
					returns the group to a cotton house, but the search yields nothing.

On the run, Christmas loses track of what day it is, running
					until he collapses from exhaustion and sleeping where and when he
					can. Starving, he eats old, worm-ridden fruit and unripe corn that
					he picks in fields. In his delirium and bedraggled state, people
					recoil from him whenever he meets or passes them on the road or
					in the backcountry. One day, he asks a farmer’s wife what day it
					is; he gets an answer but is told to keep going away from the property.
					He has the dim recollection of a black family feeding him a full
					meal. Eventually, a young man in a wagon gives him a ride to Mottstown.

A strange old couple named the Hineses have lived in Mottstown
					for nearly thirty years. Mr. Hines, also known as Uncle Doc, once
					had a mysterious job in Memphis, but he lost it long ago and has
					never seemed to work again. The couple settled in a black section
					of Mottstown, and it seems that they are able to eat only because
					several black women take pity on them and bring food to their back door.
					Over the years, Mr. Hines has taken to preaching in rural black
					churches, where in his crazed, bombastic manner he counsels black
					parishioners to accept the superiority of whites.

On the day Joe Christmas is captured and brought to town,
					Mr. Hines breaks through the crowd and comes face to face with the fugitive.
					He attempts to strike Joe with his cane but is subdued and driven
					home. When the men walk the fatigued and catatonic Mr. Hines to
					his door, his wife is unusually curious about Joe Christmas, and
					the men begin to suspect that the couple once knew the prisoner. Once
					inside, Mrs. Hines asks her husband what he did more than thirty
					years ago with a baby belonging to a woman named Milly.

The town is abuzz with the news of Christmas’s capture
					and with Mr. Hines’s bizarre behavior—after being taken home, the
					old man reappeared suddenly downtown, demanding that Christmas be killed
					immediately rather than turned over to the authorities in Jefferson.
					Mrs. Hines then goes to the jail, asking to see Christmas. The jailer
					says she must secure the sheriff’s permission first. While she is off
					trying to do so, officials from Jefferson arrive to retrieve Christmas.

A large crowd has gathered, uninterested in the reward
					money and calling Christmas’s immediate death. The men from Jefferson, however,
					are able to escort the prisoner out of the courthouse and head him
					to the waiting cars. Breaking through the crowd, Mrs. Hines stands
					before Christmas and looks at his face before he is put in the car
					and driven off. Retrieving her husband, she tries to hire a car
					to take them to Jefferson, but it is too expensive. That night,
					the couple waits at the depot for the 2:00
a.m. train
					that will take them to Jefferson.

Joe, on the lam, slides further and further from his own
					existence, crossing over a threshold to embrace and embody his bestial
					associations. On the run essentially since he has been a teenager,
					he has fallen outside of time and no longer has any idea what day
					it is. This change in him signals an even more foreboding distance
					and removal from humanity, an even wider gulf between Christmas
					and any form of acceptance, salvation, or belonging. “When he thinks about
					time,” Faulkner writes, “it seems to him now that for thirty years
					he has lived inside an orderly parade of named and numbered days
					like picket fences, and that one night he went to sleep and when he
					waked up he was outside of them.” As Joe plunges deeper and deeper
					into the backcountry, the ties that bind him to ordered, regulated
					society are severed. Night and day, the broad categories that provide
					order and a sense of definition are rendered meaningless. Joe’s
					evolution and eventual slippage outside of time mirrors the personal
					journey of Hightower, whose self-imposed exile slowly divorces him
					from a sense of time as it governs the outside world. In his cloistered
					realm, Hightower slides dangerously into a world of his own making,
					where he is beholden to none.

The importance—or lack of importance—that time has to
					many of the characters is reflected in the general overarching structure
					of the novel, with its cyclical structure and temporal shifts, as
					the main current of the plot is continuously interrupted with flashbacks
					and recurrences of the same event as told from various opposing
					perspectives. A prime example comes in the account of Christmas’s attack
					on the rural black church. The man sent to summon the sheriff does
					not know how the scene eventually plays out, and he mistakenly believes
					that Christmas has been killed by one of the angry parishioners.
					The partial, subjective, or erroneous information that individual
					characters contribute to the narrative underscores the lack of cohesion
					and unification that plagues the characters of Christmas, Miss Burden,
					and Hightower.

This section of the novel marks yet another evolution
					as Lena returns, drawn back into the action and thereby shifting
					the focus from the dark musings and aggressions of Joe Christmas
					to her guileless optimism and unquenchable life force. Lena takes
					up residence in the now abandoned cabin on the Burden property,
					symbolically replacing Christmas and negating his destructive presence. Whereas
					he brought death and suffering, she brings new life in the form
					of the newborn son she is about to deliver. As Joe moves deeper into
					self-annihilation, his existence is effaced he stands outside even nature
					itself—“a foreigner to the very immutable laws which earth must
					obey.” Lena, conversely, is tied vibrantly to time, subject to a cycle
					governed by the natural realm. Her baby represents a hope and a
					boundless possibility that Joe was never able to fulfill.

