James has dreams in which he’s abusing drugs and alcohol.
					He revisits some of the places he’s been while on drugs. He wakes
					each time struggling to remember the good in his life and reminds
					himself that he has more than he needs. In the shower, he observes
					that he’s becoming more of a human being. He tries once more to
					look himself in the eyes and finally succeeds, noting that they
					are pale green. He goes downstairs to smoke a cigarette and have
					a cup of coffee and sees Leonard coming back from a jog. Leonard
					asks James about Lilly. James asks how he knows. Leonard says Ted
					told him. James sits with his friends at breakfast and talks about
					the upcoming Heavyweight Championship. Matty knows both the fighters.

Joanne and James talk about the Twelve Step program. James still
					refuses to follow it. He hints that he does not like churches and priests.
					Joanne insists that the program is not about God. At lunch with
					Leonard and the usual crowd, Bobby, the new man, starts talking
					trash about Mikey the Nose. Leonard doesn’t make a move, he just
					watches Bobby more closely. After lunch Ken approaches James and
					asks him to sign a release so that the facility can start helping him
					to resolve his legal issues (James is wanted in three states).

Ken also tells James that he’s worried about James hanging
					out with Leonard. He tells James that Leonard is involved in the
					mob and that being involved with Leonard could hurt James somehow. James
					tells Ken that Leonard is a trustworthy friend and that he does not
					intend to stop being friends with him. Against his wishes, James’s
					parents have enrolled in the family program and are arriving from
					Japan the next day. James is livid but controls it. He leaves Ken and
					goes outside to think.

He meets Lilly at their appointed place and time and tells
					her about the girl from his past. He tells her that he fell in love
					with her but that when they were at a bar together he was arrested
					by the local police and the FBI for dealing drugs. The girl from
					James’s past told him that she wanted him to be who he is around
					her and not some person that she heard bad stories about. James
					agreed to try, and they got together. Lilly says that she wishes
					she were the girl, because she wants someone to love her. James
					tells Lilly that his parents are coming tomorrow and that he doesn’t
					want them to. She tells him he’s lucky to have parents who care
					enough to come.

James goes back to his room to find Miles sobbing. He
					goes back out again. At dinner Leonard tells James that members
					of the facility staff have been asking him about his relationship
					with James and James’s relationship with Lilly. James walks back
					and watches TV. The show is about a group of ER doctors treating
					a heroin addict. James goes back to his room, and Miles is still
					crying. James leaves and spends the rest of the night watching TV.

As life settles into a routine for James at the facility,
					he begins to explore more spiritual questions and seek deeper answers
					than he’s pursued before. Joanne’s conversation with James sets
					the stage for him to question the idea of a faith and a God who
					may be able to help him through the process of healing. But it’s
					not until Ken reveals that his parents are arriving that James really
					feels a need to find a calm place. In his walk outside just before
					he meets Lilly, he questions nature and life and all that is around
					him. He wonders if it is a God-given landscape, or if it is simply
					something that is. He wonders if he can label the
					beat of his heart, the feelings that are within him, as being God-given.

After much thinking, James settles on the thought that
					what he seeks is calm, and that he is the only one who can generate
					the calm that he needs to make it past the obstacles that life throws
					at him. He gets one example of self-imposed calm when he observes
					Leonard listening to Bobby talk trash about Mikey the Nose. Leonard
					keeps his feelings in check, when he must be seething on the inside,
					listening to someone he doesn’t respect at all talk trash about
					his adoptive father, but Leonard is old enough and wise enough to
					know that violent action at the moment would not be nearly as effective
					as just staying calm and quiet until he can really do something
					about the situation. Another good example is James’s new roommate,
					Miles, who seeks his own solace in his clarinet playing and in his
					own private moments: when James walks in on Miles crying, Miles
					doesn’t acknowledge him and just goes on doing what he needs to
					do to get through the tough times.

James finally tells the story of the girl he knew in school.
					He recounts an encounter with the local police, which consists largely of
					the police making ridiculous accusations and James playing the young
					tough guy. The story seems to have no bearing whatsoever on his
					later problems with the girl in his past, except to set her up for total
					disappointment. Lilly doesn’t seem to be interested in the girl either—she
					is more interested in how James feels about her, which serves
					to underscore the fact that Lilly is real and the girl in James’s past
					is just that: a girl in his past and nothing more. Lilly interjects
					a further reality into James’s life. She grew up with a mother who
					sold her to buy drugs, so she is encouraged by the fact that James’s
					parents want to come see him for the Family Program.

One very telling moment in James’s day is his experience
					at dinner, just after he sees Lilly. Seeing her has “filled” James,
					momentarily, and he now has a heightened sense of when it is that
					he feels he needs something. He’s come to grips with the fact that
					he is constantly feeding some addiction or another and that Lilly
					is a type of addiction for him. Therefore, he makes a conscious
					effort at dinner not to eat so much that he throws up, as he’s done
					in days past. He eats one soggy fish stick after another, bite by
					bite, slowly, until he clears his plate. He remembers Leonard’s
					advice to just hold on and follows it until something else comes
					along for him to do.

