Upon learning of Saul’s defeat by the Philistines, David
					sings a song lamenting the deaths of Saul and his friend, Jonathan.
					David goes to Hebron, where his followers and the southern tribe
					of Judah anoint him as king. Meanwhile, Saul’s chief commander,
					Abner, garners the support of the northern tribes and instates Saul’s
					son, Ish-Bosheth, as king of Israel. A war ensues between the conflicting
					regimes, played out in a series of small hand-to-hand contests between Abner’s
					men and the army of Joab, David’s general.

When Ish-Bosheth falsely accuses Abner of sleeping with
					one of the royal concubines, Abner defects to David’s court. David
					welcomes Abner’s support. Abner convinces the other tribes to recognize
					David’s claim to the throne. Joab, however, seeks revenge for his
					brother’s earlier death at Abner’s hands, and he stabs Abner in secret.
					David’s public censure of Joab and mourning for Abner wins Israel’s
					respect, and two of Ish-Bosheth’s men betray their ruler by presenting
					David with the severed head of the northern king. David is horrified
					that they have killed an innocent man, and he publicly executes
					these men. The united tribes declare David king of Israel.

David leads the Israelites in conquering the city of
					Jerusalem, a Canaanite stronghold lingering in the heart of Israel’s
					territory. He erects his palace there and calls it “The City of
					David” or “Zion.” Growing in power, David quells the ever-present
					Philistine threat in a decisive military victory. With the help
					of thirty thousand Israelites, David brings the Ark of the Covenant
					to Jerusalem in an elaborate procession. Amidst shouting and music,
					David dances and leaps in front of the Ark, to the embarrassment
					of his wife Michal. David rebukes her, claiming that he will humiliate
					himself as much as he wants so long as it pleases God. God is pleased
					that David has made a permanent home for the Ark and reveals a message
					to David’s prophet, Nathan. God vows to grant Israel rest from foreign opposition
					and promises that the kingdom of David will last forever. With Joab’s
					services, David subdues the nations of the surrounding area, expanding
					Israel’s borders while developing diplomatic relations with the
					neighboring kingdoms.

One day, David watches a woman bathing from the rooftop
					of his palace. He summons the woman, Bathsheba, and has sex with her,
					and the woman becomes pregnant. Unable to disguise his indiscretion,
					David sends her husband, Uriah, to die on the battlefield. David
					marries Bathsheba, but Nathan confronts the king about his wrongdoing.
					Nathan tells a parable about a wealthy man who steals a poor man’s
					only prized sheep. David is outraged by such selfishness, and Nathan
					informs David that the parable is about him. Nathan predicts that
					God will bring calamity on David’s household. David repents for
					his wrongdoing, but, despite his fasting and praying, Bathsheba’s
					son dies during childbirth. Afterward, David and Bathsheba have
					another son, Solomon.

David’s older son Amnon falls in love with his half-sister
					Tamar and rapes her. David is furious but does nothing. Instead,
					Tamar’s brother Absalom invites Amnon out to the country, where he
					and David’s other sons murder Amnon. Absalom flees to a remote city for
					three years, but David, after mourning for Amnon, allows his son
					Absalom back to Jerusalem.

Absalom plots a conspiracy, forming an army and winning
					the hearts of the Israelite people through displays of warmth and
					kindness. Supported by David’s chief counselor, Absalom goes to Hebron
					where his followers pronounce him king. Informed of this event,
					David flees from Jerusalem with his men, and the people of the countryside
					weep as he marches by. One of Saul’s relatives, however, curses
					and throws stones at the band, gloating over David’s demise. David
					forbids his attendants to punish the man.

Absalom enters Jerusalem where, in a display of defiance,
					he has sex with David’s concubines. Absalom’s aides advise him to
					attack David immediately, but one of David’s officials, pretending
					to support Absalom, persuades Absalom to wait. This delay gives
					David time to muster an army, and his forces kill twenty thousand
					of Absalom’s followers in the forests of Ephraim. Riding along, Absalom
					catches his head in the branches of a tree. Joab ignores David’s
					instructions to treat Absalom gently and drives three spears into
					Absalom’s hanging body. When David is notified of Absalom’s death,
					he weeps, screaming repeatedly, “O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my
					son, my son!” (19:4).

To the frustration of his officials, David shows mercy
					to all of Absalom’s supporters who approach him for forgiveness,
					especially Absalom’s commander Amasa. David sends messengers to
					the leaders of Judah, and the tribe welcomes him back to Jerusalem.
					The remaining tribes—Absalom’s chief supporters—fear that David
					will be angry at them. An uprising ensues, but Joab traps the rebels
					in a city and the city’s residents hand over the severed head of
					the rebel leader. Angered that David has shown mercy to Amasa, Joab
					stabs Amasa one day while pretending to greet him.

David rebuilds his throne with continued acts of local
					diplomacy and with military victories over the Philistines. He composes
					a song praising God as a loving and kind deliverer, and the narrator
					briefly recounts the feats of David’s most famous fighting men.

The major scholarly debate over 2 Samuel
					involves whether or not the book describes David in a negative or
					positive light. Chapters 9–20 of 2 Samuel
					are not necessarily complimentary. David commits adultery, tries
					to have his mistress’s husband killed, and loses control of his
					sons. At the same time, however, the narrator explains how each
					of these incidents actually proves David’s righteousness. Not only
					are David’s sons blamed for their own actions, but David’s own repentance
					for his misdeeds is described as exemplary. The circumstances surrounding David’s
					reign suggest that God approves of David’s actions. David’s kingdom
					in Zion represents the fulfillment of God’s promises to Abraham,
					Jacob, and Moses. It establishes the unified tribes of Israel in
					the promised land under the rule of a divinely sanctioned leader.
					David’s triumphal entry into Jerusalem with the Ark of the Covenant
					marks the story’s climax, symbolizing the ideal combination of religion
					and politics in Israel and the peaceful unification of God and man
					in one city. The image of an organized procession of song and dance
					around a symbol of God suggests that the people have, temporarily,
					reconciled their earthly aspirations with their religious commitments. 2 Samuel
					is characterized by the contrast between joyful images and images
					of civil conflict and confusion. All of the challengers to David’s
					throne in Samuel lose their heads, symbolizing their thwarted attempts
					to become the head of Israel. David’s retreat from Jerusalem to
					the sound of weeping and cursing contrasts with his earlier celebratory
					march into the city. Geographical motifs further reinforce this
					sense of division and loss. Ish-Bosheth’s challenge to the throne
					divides Israel into two halves, northern and southern. Absalom is
					declared king outside of Jerusalem in Hebron, a symbol of his dissent
					from David, while his exhibition at the top of the palace represents
					his ascent to power. David, meanwhile, must move out from the center
					of Israel and across the Jordan River—the chief mark of one’s exile
					from the promised land.

Individual characters express differing opinions
					about David’s method of ruling. In one sense, David’s mercy shows
					great prudence, for his tolerance of Ish-Bosheth eventually earns
					the respect of Ish-Bosheth’s subjects. However, David’s reluctance
					to punish Amnon for the rape of Tamar seems more permissive than
					just, and only fosters Absalom’s rage. Joab similarly believes that
					David’s kindness to Abner and Amasa is the result of oversight.
					Joab’s decision to take matters into his own hands makes Joab a
					foil to David. While Joab is suspicious of others and concerned
					with end results, David is trusting and believes that an earnest
					response in the present moment is more important than outcomes.
					David’s trust in the impulses of the present moment is the source
					of his greatest failing, his lust for Bathsheba. David’s immediate impulses
					are also the source of the narrative’s greatest moment of pathos—David’s
					desperate cries for Absalom. Nevertheless, his mercy stabilizes
					Israel by providing second chances, not only to political rebels,
					but to some of the nation’s most intriguing characters, such as Saul’s
					cursing relative.

