The next day in Potions, the students are assigned antidotes,
					and the Half-Blood Prince’s textbook is of no help to Harry. He
					finally finds the words “Just shove a bezoar down their throats”
					scribbled in a margin. Rummaging through the supply cupboard, Harry
					finds a bezoar, a stone from the stomach of a goat, and runs back
					to his seat. When Slughorn approaches his cauldron, Harry hands
					over the bezoar, and Slughorn laughs. After class, Harry asks Slughorn about
					Horcruxes, and Slughorn freezes. He knows immediately that Dumbledore
					has sent Harry and refuses to answer. The students begin their Apparition
					lessons. It is normally impossible to Apparate or Disapparate within
					Hogwarts, but the restrictions are lifted within the Great Hall
					for one hour so the students can practice. After Apparition practice,
					Ron and Harry return to the dorms, and Harry pulls out the Marauder’s
					Map to try and locate where in Hogwarts Draco Malfoy is. Ron spots
					him in the Slytherin common room. Harry continues to regularly consult
					the Marauder’s Map to check on Draco’s whereabouts. Sometimes he
					is unable to locate him on the map at all.

On the morning of his birthday, Ron tears through the
					presents at the foot of his bed as Harry rummages through his trunk
					for the Marauder’s Map. Ron starts eating Chocolate Cauldrons and
					leans on his bedpost, looking unfocused. Ron tells Harry he’s in
					love with Romilda Vane. Harry suddenly realizes that Ron has eaten
					the love potion–spiked Chocolate Cauldrons Romilda slipped him before Christmas—they
					fell out of Harry’s trunk and Ron assumed they were one of his presents.
					Harry brings Ron to Slughorn, who makes an antidote, which Ron quickly
					drinks. Slughorn pulls out a bottle of oak-matured mead he intended
					to give Dumbledore for Christmas and pours Ron a glass. Ron drinks
					his before the toast is over and suddenly shoots up in the air,
					his eyes bulging and foam coming from his mouth. Slughorn appears
					mystified, and Harry sprints to the cabinet and finds a bezoar,
					which he shoves down Ron’s throat. Ron gasps and goes still.

In the hospital wing, Fred, George, Ginny, Hermione, Hagrid, and
					Harry gather to look after Ron. Ginny points out that if Slughorn
					had intended to give the mead to Dumbledore, the poison might have
					been intended for Dumbledore as well. Mr. and Mrs. Weasley arrive,
					and Harry, Hagrid, and Hermione leave. Harry is approached by Cormac
					McLaggen, who wants to know if he can replace Ron as Quidditch Keeper.
					Harry agrees. On the way to the Quidditch pitch for a match against
					Hufflepuff, Harry spots Draco walking away from the field with two
					young girls. Harry is desperate to know where Draco is going but
					is already late for the match. During the game, Harry is hit with
					a Bludger. Harry wakes up in the hospital wing next to Ron. Madam
					Pomfrey tells Harry that he cracked his skull. Ron tells Harry that
					Gryffindor lost the match by a landslide. Harry remembers seeing
					Malfoy before the match and summons Kreacher, who instantly appears
					with Dobby, the Hogwarts House Elf. Harry requests that the two
					elves follow Malfoy, making sure to tell Kreacher he cannot warn
					Malfoy or fill him in.

Harry’s quick thinking and the Half-Blood Prince’s Potions
					textbook are the only things that keep Ron from being killed by
					Slughorn’s poisoned mead. Although Hermione is generally unhappy with
					Harry’s use of the Half-Blood Prince’s Potions textbook, she must
					concede that this time its advice saved Ron’s life. Without the bezoar,
					Ron would have died. Before pouring their drinks, Slughorn told
					Ron and Harry that he was planning on giving the bottle to Dumbledore
					for Christmas, but never did—this means that two cursed, murderous
					objects did not manage to reach their intended owners this semester.
					Just like Katie Bell and the cursed necklace, Slughorn’s poisoned
					mead was obviously meant for someone other than Ron. Clearly, whoever
					is responsible for planting these dangerous objects has not been
					planning his or her attacks very well, as both attempts failed.
					The clumsiness of these attacks points to Draco Malfoy, since he
					is a young and unaccomplished wizard, prone to adolescent mistakes.
					A more sophisticated villain might have realized that Horace Slughorn
					was more likely to keep the mead for his own use, as he is obviously
					very fond of food and drink and absorbed with his own comfort.

Harry’s preoccupation with Draco grows with each chapter.
					In Chapter 19, Harry
					is hit with a Bludger in the Quidditch match against Hufflepuff,
					and its seems highly likely that this only happened because Harry
					was too distracted to be playing Quidditch, thinking only about
					Draco and where he may have been going with two young girls. Usually,
					Harry is an expert Quidditch player, and mishaps such as this one
					are not common—but this time his mind was simply not on the game.
					Harry has started regularly consulting the Marauder’s Map to locate
					Draco within Hogwarts, but he seems confounded by the fact that
					there are times when he cannot find Draco at all and has no leads
					as to where he might be going or hiding. To help him figure it all
					out, Harry enlists the help of Kreacher, Sirius Black’s former House
					Elf, and Dobby, the Hogwarts House Elf. While Dobby clearly adores
					Harry, Kreacher is extremely unhappy to be forced to take orders
					from a Half-Blood like Harry. Consequently, asking Kreacher for
					help is a surprisingly risky move for Harry. Once again, Harry’s
					obsession with Draco leads him to take unnecessary chances.

Even though Kreacher must obey Harry’s orders, since Harry
					is his new master, his true allegiances lie with the Black family
					and Bellatrix Lestrange, an infamous Death Eater. Harry remembers
					to tell Kreacher that he cannot alert or warn Draco Malfoy that
					he is being followed, but it still seems remarkably dangerous for
					Harry to place so much trust in a creature that is inherently predisposed
					to disliking Harry and wanting to thwart his mission. Meanwhile,
					the students are becoming increasingly excited about taking the
					Apparition tests, because they will provide the young wizards with
					a great deal of new freedom. The easiest Muggle parallel to draw
					is to a teenager’s driving test—learning to drive is a difficult
					but ultimately rewarding lesson. Students who live up to the challenge
					are rewarded with liberation, adult responsibility, and a sense
					of maturity.

