Laura briefed her four daughters on their manners before
					the family went out to dinner with an important couple, the Fannings.
					She warned them to behave themselves and to let her order for them. The
					family had been in the United States for three months after escaping
					from the secret police, and Laura would often cry or lose her temper.
					She tried to interest the girls in the dinner at a Spanish restaurant
					by mentioning a floorshow with flamenco dancers. Sandra was upset
					by an unfriendly and prejudiced neighbor who complained about the
					noise the girls made.

The family put on their best clothes for the dinner and
					got excited for the special occasion. Dr. Fanning had arranged for
					the family's arrival in the U.S. through a fellowship, and was helping
					Carlos get a job and pass the American medical licensing exam. The
					couple realized the family had little money, and wanted to treat
					them to a little luxury. Sandra secretly hoped the Fannings might
					adopt her so she could be rich and have an allowance. Their mother's
					father paid the rent, bought the girls' clothes, and took them to
					the ballet.

That night their father splurged and they took a taxi
					to the restaurant. Sandra realized she missed the chauffeurs and
					maids she was used to in the Dominican Republic. Their mother insisted
					it was fair that the Fannings pay for the elegant dinner, since
					her family had hosted them luxuriously when they visited the Dominican
					Republic. Their father was embarrassed by his temporary inability
					to support his family.

Sandra thought Dr. Fanning's wife was ugly and did not
					understand why he had married her. Sandra flirted with the busboy
					and drank so much water that she had to go to the bathroom. Her
					father and Mrs. Fanning accompanied her, and Sandra noticed when
					Mrs. Fanning planted a brief kiss on her father's lips. Sandra was
					shocked by what she had seen. In the bathroom mirror she noticed
					that she was a very pretty girl and could even pass for an American
					because of her light coloring. Her father asked her not to tell
					her mother that the drunken woman had kissed him. Sandra then feared
					that the busboy would try the same thing on her. Mrs. Fanning kept
					drinking more wine until Dr. Fanning told the waiter not to serve
					her any more. Mrs. Fanning called him a "party fart," which the
					girls did not understand. Sandra did not eat her food and instead
					watched the beautiful and passionate dancers. Then Mrs. Fanning
					ran on stage and made a fool of herself, which the rest of the restaurant enjoyed
					watching. Sandra resented her ruining the show, though Dr. Fanning
					then toasted to the family's arrival in the United States.

When offered a little Barbie doll dressed as a flamenco
					dancer, Sandra ignored her mother's warning not to ask for extra
					treats from the Fannings and asked to buy the doll. Her father refused,
					but Mrs. Fanning insisted that her husband pay for four dolls, one
					for each girl. When her mother prompted her to say thank you, Sandra made
					her doll give Mrs. Fanning a kiss on the cheek and said "gracias."


The entire family feels an enormous pressure to behave
					properly in an American social setting, and express their gratitude
					for the favors Dr. Fanning has done for the family. They also need
					to let loose for a night and have some fun after the traumas of
					leaving the Island and immigrating to the United States. The family
					was used to a very high standard of living in the Dominican Republic,
					and they feel deprived by having to live in a small apartment, consider
					the needs of unfriendly neighbors, and adapt culturally and economically
					to their new situation. The outing with Dr. Fanning presents the opportunity
					to prove that they can survive and even enjoy the process of becoming
					Americans. Sandra's perspective on the evening is crucial because
					she witnesses a darker and embarrassing side of American culture.
					The Spanish restaurant serves as a kind of cultural haven, where
					Sandra feels like her heritage is appreciated and celebrated rather
					than complained about to the superintendent of their apartment building.
					The drunken American woman intrudes into this cultural haven twice,
					first by kissing her father, and secondly by interrupting the dancers'
					act.

Though Sandra seeks a respite from American culture, she
					cannot separate herself in a fantasy of passion and artistry for
					long. The issue of class also interrupts her family's fantasy of
					luxury. Especially for a child like Sandra, who had been spoiled
					in the Dominican Republic by her family's wealth and social position,
					it was difficult to transition into a social setting where her family
					name earned her no particular respect or extravagance. For her father,
					the shame of his inability to provide his family with the same wealth
					and prestige they had enjoyed at home leads to a sense of powerlessness. His
					desire to fit into the American culture leaves him unprepared to deal
					with an unexpected situation, and he is mortified by the idea of scandalizing
					his family and his benefactor by exposing Mrs. Fanning's indiscretion.

Ironically, despite the family being on their best behavior,
					the evening turns out to be an enormous embarrassment for all involved.
					Sandra uses this awkward moment to get a doll, perhaps indicating
					that she will be able to manipulate social situations in her new
					culture to get what she wants materially.

