The next morning, Cal tells Quinn that he now knows he loves her after seeing her help rescue Lump. Fox and Layla take Lump outside, and Fox offers Layla a job as his assistant. Layla says she doesn’t feel qualified, but Fox insists that she is. 

While the six friends split up chores, Quinn receives an email from her grandmother. She gathers the group together and tells them that one of her ancestors, a man named Sebastian Deale, settled in Hawkins Hollow in 1651 with his family, which included a daughter named Hester. Quinn says that Hester’s daughter must have been fathered by the demon in the form of Lazarus Twisse, which was why Hester drowned herself. Hester’s daughter had two daughters of her own, one of whom married Duncan Clark, who they believe to be an ancestor of Layla’s. Cybil figures out that her ancestors must have been part of the bloodline somewhere as well. 

Quinn feels upset to learn that the three of them are descended from the demon and wonders if they are there to make sure the Seven continues. She and Cybil argue over this, and Quinn and Cal leave the room. Cal tells her that what they have learned doesn’t change how he feels about her and that he will help her get through it.

The revelations of this chapter illustrate the theme of the complexity of good and evil. The six friends realize that they have within them the blood of Dent/the ancient wizard and the blood of Twisse/the ancient demon. Quinn questions her own morality and whether she might bring about the evil she’s trying to prevent. However, her revulsion at her demon ancestry is another sign that she is a force of good. Just as Dent wrapped his arms around the demon to drag him into the fire, the six friends must not be afraid to face and even embrace the evil they seek to destroy.

The name Lazarus calls to mind Lazarus of Bethany in the Judeo-Christian Bible, who was brought back to life by Jesus Christ days after his death. The story of Lazarus Twisse inverts the Lazarus of Bethany narrative. Lazarus of Bethany’s resurrection proved that Jesus Christ was capable of miracles. Every seven years, the demon that was within Lazarus Twisse rises from the dead and wreaks havoc on Hawkins Hollow. Like Jesus, the demon’s goal, it seems, is to prove his own power, but instead of causing great good, the demon wants to cause death and destruction.

As the six learn more and more about the past, the action required in the present becomes clearer, too. Cal finally understands, after witnessing Quinn’s bravery with Lump, that he is in love with Quinn, and he tells her. Fox finally convinces Layla to take a job with him, solidifying her commitment not only to him but to her work in Hawkins Hollow. The six even work out a system to maintain the daily chores for house they use as headquarters. As the past becomes clearer and the future remains unknown, the six commit more and more to taking decisive action in the present.

