Stiva sets the novel in motion, not only in terms of plot—as
				the domestic upheaval caused by his affair with the family's governess
				brings Anna to Moscow, and thus to Vronsky—but also in terms of theme.
				Stiva embodies the notion that life is meant to be lived and enjoyed, not
				repressed by duties. He lives for the moment, thinking about responsibility
				only later, as his constant financial problems remind us. His dazed reaction
				to being chastised for adultery is not so much regret at his wrongdoing
				but rather regret at being caught. Indeed, even after Dolly forgives
				Stiva, he does not stop carrying on with other women. He does not
				feel any duty toward his wife and family that constrains his freedom.

Despite Stiva's actions, the novel does not portray him as
				exceptionally villainous. On the contrary, he represents an ordinary
				man in 19th century Russia. He is kind and jovial and genuinely loves
				his wife and family, yet he feels entitled to have sex with whomever he
				pleases. This apparent paradox in his character highlights the patriarchal
				nature of Russian society at the time. Stiva is essentially free to enjoy
				himself, while his wife is expected to endure his affairs in good-natured
				silence. Stiva nonetheless hides his affairs because he recognizes that he
				has a duty to be faithful to his wife, however lightly he—and society—may
				regard that duty.

Stiva's affair with his family's governess sets the stage for
				Anna’s much more dramatic struggle between private passion and social obligation.
				Like Anna, Stiva seeks out love and satisfaction in any way that is personally
				meaningful for him. But the similarity ends there. Stiva is far shallower than
				his sister, and lacks her emotional self-reflection and passionate intensity. His
				love affairs are trifles to him, whereas Anna’s becomes a matter of life and death
				to her. Stiva is not a dynamic character in the novel—he does not change.
				He is never punished for his sins and never improves his behavior. In short,
				Stiva’s constancy brings into relief the extraordinary changes—moral, spiritual,
				and psychological—that Anna undergoes.

