	When Evelyn catches up with Rayona, Rayona is looking
					out at the yellow raft, hoping she can forget her troubles if she
					stares hard enough. Evelyn says nothing, but Rayona tells her the
					whole story. When she is finished, Rayona feels as if a burden has
					been lifted from her. Evelyn decides that Rayona needs to go home,
					and that she and Sky are going to drive Rayona there. After his
					initial surprise when Evelyn and Rayona arrive at the gas station
					to pick him up, Sky closes up the gas station and gets ready to
					go. Rayona packs her clothes in a case that Evelyn gives her, and
					she takes the videos from Village Video. Rayona knows that there
					is an Indian rodeo in the nearby town of Havre that day and thinks
					that might be a good place to look for her mother.

	As soon as they get to the rodeo, Rayona sees Foxy. Foxy
					is, as usual, quite rude to Rayona and immediately antagonizes Evelyn, who
					reacts with hostility. Sky and Evelyn look for seats in the bleachers
					and leave Rayona and Foxy to talk. Foxy is supposed to be in the
					rodeo, riding a horse belonging to Dayton, Christine’s boyfriend.
					Foxy, however, is much too drunk to ride, so he tells Rayona to
					ride for him and flashes a knife to make sure she obeys. To make sure
					no one knows Rayona is a girl, Foxy lends her his hat and jacket.
					As Rayona is heading over to the stock pens, she sees Annabelle.
					Annabelle is outraged when she learns Foxy has been drinking. Rayona
					thinks to herself that her mother must have looked like Annabelle
					when she was young. Rayona is reminded of Ellen, but Ellen does
					not compare to Annabelle.

	Rayona climbs onto the horse and spends a nervous moment
					in the pen before her ride begins. Babe, the horse, throws her three times
					in one minute, but Rayona keeps getting back on with tenacious determination.
					By the end of the minute both girl and horse are exhausted. After
					the ride, Rayona feels changed. Bearpaw Lake and the people she
					has worked with for the past few weeks seem very far away. Everyone
					is very impressed by Rayona’s bravery in the rodeo. Annabelle calls
					Rayona “insane,” but in a notably friendly tone. When the awards
					are given out at the end of the day, Rayona—or rather, Foxy—is given
					a special prize: the “hard-luck buckle.” When Rayona gets up to
					claim her award, she notices everyone looking closely at her. She
					takes off her hat and jacket, and from across the arena, Evelyn
					starts cheering for her. Soon, everyone else cheers as well.

When Rayona returns to the lake to stare at the yellow
					raft, she longs one last time to escape her troubles, then bids
					her fantasy life farewell. Rayona feels that if she stares at the
					raft long enough it “will launch [her] out of [her] present troubles.”
					This raft is the gateway to the life Rayona has been trying to live,
					and is the site of her most recent realizations. First the raft
					is the place where she drifts from Father Tom and breaks the last
					bond to her old life, and then it is where she first sees Ellen,
					who lives the life Rayona wants. Rayona is now, however, unable
					to lose her troubles in such fantasies because Evelyn, who knows
					that Rayona’s world is only an illusion, is standing right behind
					her. Rayona idealizes Ellen’s life, but she nevertheless feels that
					something took “a weight off” when she confesses her story to Evelyn.
					When Rayona plunges back into reality she no longer has to bear
					the burden of sustaining a lie and risking exposure as a fraud.
					Rayona feels real for the first time in months.

	Rayona’s first encounter with her old life is with Foxy,
					whom she sees at the rodeo. This encounter is the worst possible
					beginning to Rayona’s reunion with her past, as Foxy is the cruelest
					of all the young people on the reservation, but Evelyn gives Rayona
					the power and confidence to deal with Foxy. Evelyn motivates Rayona to
					stand up for herself not by connecting her to some fantasy but by showing
					Rayona that she cares about and supports her. In this way, Evelyn
					fills in a gap left by Christine, who has never really bothered to
					act as her daughter’s ally. 

	In any case, Rayona ends up on the back of the wild horse,
					and her perseverance in staying on the horse is symbolic of her
					new attempt to live the life she has been given. Riding the horse
					is a liberating experience for Rayona because it is something real,
					an experience that is hers and under her control alone. It is true
					that she is disguised as a boy for her ride, but this temporary
					transformation allows her to escape from her idealistic self to
					a more realistic version of herself. In other words, the identity
					she assumes in the rodeo is much more relevant to her life than
					the identity she dreams up for herself, and it still liberates her
					to some degree. By riding, Rayona gains the acceptance and admiration
					of many of the people in the arena. She gains this admiration by
					being her real self, not her fantasy self.

