A young Iranian girl and the narrator and protagonist. Marji is highly intelligent, perceptive, and sensitive. She is confident and brave, and she speaks her mind, often to her detriment. Marji comes of age during Iran’s Islamic Revolution of 1979. As the health of Iranian society deteriorates, so does Marji’s mental and emotional health. Her sense of independence and justice makes the society in which she grows up especially challenging.

Read an in-depth analysis of Marji Satrapi.

Marji’s uncle on her father’s side. Uncle Anoush and Marji are similar in many ways, especially in their sense of justice and their idealism, and they establish a special connection as soon as they meet. Anoush represents the idealism of the Revolution and the optimism of the Revolution’s earliest days. Likewise, his death represents the disillusionment so many Iranians felt watching the Islamic regime rise to power.

Read an in-depth analysis of Uncle Anoush.

Marji’s father. Ebi Satrapi is a successful professional of Iran’s upper-middle class. He believes in democracy and hates the Islamic regime. His family’s privilege keeps the Satrapis safe, and his practicality keeps his idealism in check. Ebi makes the decision to stay in Iran rather than emigrate to the United States because he fears losing his social status and building a life from scratch while having to work menial jobs.

Read an in-depth analysis of Ebi Satrapi.

Marji’s mother. Taji is the daughter of a former Iranian prince. She is fiercely independent yet also extremely practical and generous. She is the disciplinarian in the family and often has to encourage Marji to think more about her safety. Taji loves her daughter deeply and constantly worries about how living under the Islamic regime is affecting Marji.

Read an in-depth analysis of Taji Satrapi.

Marji’s grandmother on her mother’s side. Marji’s grandmother is kind, stoic, and wise. She dotes on Marji and passes her wisdom on to her. Marji’s grandmother represents the endurance of the long-suffering Iranian people. Though Reza Shah’s coup took everything from her family, she holds fast to her dignity and teaches Marji how to do the same.

The Satrapi’s live-in maid. Mehri is uneducated and comes from a family that was too poor to care for her. She is a simple person who falls in love with the next-door neighbor despite never meeting him in person. Her story represents the strict class divide in Iran and the way class resentment leads to the Revolution.

Marji’s uncle. Taher is a ruined man who constantly worries about his son and the people of Iran. His death is a direct result of the Iranian regime’s cruel and arbitrary policies.

An apparition of God from Marji’s imagination who visits her at night. God represents Marji’s innocence and deep faith. She casts God out of her life when she loses both.

The Shah of Iran. The Shah is as venal, proud, and cruel as he is undeserving of his position as ruler. His ouster sets in motion an eventual coup by Iran’s religious fanatics.

Marji’s grandfather on her mother’s side. Marji’s grandfather is amiable and easygoing. Even when everything he owns is confiscated by Reza Shah and he is imprisoned, he takes his misfortunes in stride.

A member of the communist resistance movement against the Shah and Ebi’s friend. Moshen endures imprisonment and vicious torture at the hands of the Shah’s government only to be assassinated by the new regime.

A writer in the communist resistance movement and Ebi’s friend. Siamek is imprisoned and tortured by the Shah’s regime and later released. He manages to escape persecution by the new regime by fleeing the country.

A friend of the Satrapis and a refugee from the south of Iran. Mali’s pride is injured when she overhears a pair of Iranian women disparaging refugees.

The wife of Uncle Taher. Uncle Taher’s wife is emotionally fragile and constantly worried for her family. She is desperate to get a passport for her husband so he can receive medical care overseas.

The husband of Mali. Mali’s husband cares mostly about his wealth, which he has lost due to the war with Iraq.

A maker of fake passports and friend of Ebi’s. Khosro is brave and principled. He houses political refugees and makes fake passports for those who need it.

One of the Satrapis’ maids. Mrs. Nasrine is poor and has a young son around Marji’s age. Her and her son’s story illustrates the way the Iranian regime manipulates the poor to support the war effort.

The daughter of the Satrapis’ Jewish neighbors. Neda is killed in an Iraqi bombing raid.

The Shah’s father. Reza Shah is an uneducated man whom the British government supports in a successful coup.

A schoolmate of Marji’s. Pardisse’s father is a fighter pilot who is killed in the war. Pardisse is proud of her father and gives a moving presentation about him in front of the class.

A communist activist taking refuge in Khosro’s home. Niloufar is discovered, raped, and executed.

