Two months after his visit home, Frédéric is in Paris
					for law school. He has convinced Monsieur Roque to introduce him
					to Monsieur Dambreuse, and he visits Dambreuse with Roque’s letter
					of introduction. Dambreuse works in industry and is very wealthy,
					with important political connections. Madame Dambreuse is a socialite. Dambreuse
					asks Frédéric a few questions and then sends him away. As he walks
					home, he passes a shop and sees a sign saying Jacques Arnoux—it
					is Monsieur Arnoux’s art shop. Frédéric hopes to spot Madame Arnoux,
					but she does not appear.

Depressed and aimless, Frédéric stops attending classes
					and scorns his friend Baptiste Martinon’s version of happiness.
					He wanders the streets of Paris, seeing echoes of Madame Arnoux
					in women’s faces. He never receives an invitation from the Dambreuses,
					and the friend Deslauriers suggests he contact, a math teacher named
					Senecal, never returns his attempted visits. He goes back to law
					school. He tries to write a novel, and he tries to compose music
					on the piano.

One night at the theater, he spots Arnoux with two women. Arnoux
					is wearing a black mourning band around his hat, and Frédéric wonders
					if Madame Arnoux is dead. He goes to Arnoux’s shop and asks a clerk
					if the couple are doing well; they are. Reassured, he leaves the
					shop, but he is still melancholy. He visits home, then he returns
					to Paris and gets a new apartment. He begins to lose interest in
					Madame Arnoux.

As Frédéric goes to class one morning, he sees chaos in
					the streets. He asks a young man named Hussonnet what’s going on.
					Hussonnet says that no one knows—it’s a riot where even the rioters
					don’t know what they’re rioting about. Various political events
					from the past few months have resulted in frequent protests.

Frédéric’s friend Martinon appears, frightened of potential
					secret societies among the rioters. Hussonnet says the government
					has made up the idea of secret societies to instill fear in the
					middle class. The riot begins breaking up, and a professor named
					Samuel Rondelot appears on his way to class. The crowd turns on
					him simply because he is an authority figure, and he retreats. The
					rowdy crowd starts heckling the police. A fight ensues, and a policeman
					pushes a young protestor. A large man carrying a box drops the box
					and tackles the offending policeman. As police lead him to jail,
					he announces that his name is Dussardier and that he wants his box.
					Frédéric and Hussonnet follow him.

In jail, they ask to see Dussardier, who doesn’t know
					them. They try to get him to say he is a law student as a way of
					indicating that they are there to help him, but it takes him a while
					to catch on. Dussardier takes a smashed pipe from his pocket—a pipe
					he’d spent years making and which was broken in the fight. Frédéric
					gives Dussardier some cigars, and Dussardier is overcome with gratitude.

Back on the street, Hussonnet reveals that he works at
					Monsieur Arnoux’s magazine, L’Art Industriel. Frédéric
					and Hussonnet exchange addresses and promise to meet again. Reluctant
					to visit Hussonnet too soon, Frédéric deliberately runs into him
					one evening, and they go to Frédéric’s apartment to talk. Hussonnet wants
					to become famous in the theater; he writes musical comedies and
					songs. He insults Frédéric’s books of poetry, written by poets from
					the Romantic school who he claims had no common sense. Angry, Frédéric
					gets to the point and asks Hussonnet if he can take him to Arnoux’s
					house. Hussonnet agrees.

Soon, they visit the Arnouxes’ house. It is full of artists,
					and Hussonnet engages in a passionate debate about the role of money
					in art. Arnoux invites him and Frédéric back. Various people come
					in and out of the shop below Arnoux’s home, including a man named Regimbart,
					and the afternoon wears on. Discussion turns to politics and gossip.
					Soon people begin to leave, and Frédéric walks for a while with
					an artist named Pellerin. They agree to see each other again.

Pellerin is a mostly unsuccessful artist who has made
					nothing but sketches. When Frédéric visits him, he sometimes finds
					Pellerin in bed, having been out at the theater late. He never mentions
					Madame Arnoux to Frédéric, but one day Frédéric sees a sketch that
					resembles her in one of Pellerin’s sketchbooks. Pellerin says Arnoux
					has many mistresses, but that Madame Arnoux is virtuous.

Frédéric also spends time with Regimbart, another friend
					of Arnoux’s, who drinks a lot, plays billiards, and does not do
					any work. Arnoux admires him, and Frédéric tolerates him for this
					reason only.

Though Frédéric looks up to Arnoux as a man who values
					the arts, Arnoux actually is a shrewd art seller who often cheats
					his customers. However, he thinks of himself as honest.

Arnoux actually does not live at the home where Frédéric
					has been spending so much time. Frédéric accompanies Regimbart and Pellerin
					to a bar, where the two older men complain about Arnoux. Frédéric
					stands up for Arnoux, but when he goes back to see him under the
					pretense of looking for a lost notebook, he suddenly sees Arnoux
					as vulgar. He leaves, convinced he won’t be back.

Deslauriers sends a letter to Frédéric announcing that
					he is returning to Paris. But on the day he is to arrive, Arnoux
					invites Frédéric to dinner, and Frédéric can think of nothing else.
					When Deslauriers arrives, Frédéric doesn’t tell him he’s made other
					plans for the evening and feels guilty. The two sit down and talk.
					New clothes are delivered for Frédéric, who has ordered a new outfit
					in anticipation of his dinner. He confesses to Deslauriers that
					he is going to dinner.

Frédéric arrives at the Arnouxes’ home and finally sees
					Madame Arnoux, who claims to remember him. The meal is lavish, and
					the conversation about travel and art is engrossing. Madame Arnoux leaves
					the table when liquor is served, and the men discuss women. Frédéric
					is surprised by the vulgarity. Later, in the drawing room, Madame
					Arnoux returns and shows the men a romantic gift Arnoux gave her—a
					piece of Renaissance art. Arnoux kisses her.

When Madame Arnoux eventually talks to Frédéric, he is thrilled,
					but he cannot look her in the face. Then she is asked by one of
					the guests to sing. She sings a song in Italian, which Frédéric
					does not understand. She offers Frédéric her hand before he leaves.
					He goes out into the darkened streets, certain that he is meant
					to be a painter and that this vocation will lead him to Madame Arnoux. When
					he arrives home, he finds Deslauriers sleeping in a closet. He had
					forgotten he was there.

As winter settles onto Paris, Frédéric’s confidence is
					shaken by a series of rejections that leave him lonely, defeated,
					and depressed, feelings that are mirrored in the way Flaubert describes
					the scenes. As Frédéric is rejected or ignored by the wealthy Monsieur
					Dambreuse and Arnoux, he loses his energy, and life becomes dull. Flaubert
					presents a series of small dissatisfactions that illustrate his general
					unhappiness: he has to deal with annoyances such as laundry and
					the unpleasant concierge; he doesn’t like his room; he doesn’t like
					overhearing the happy students next door. He spends time with his
					happy friend Martinon, but he is annoyed by Martinon’s happiness
					in his simple domestic pleasures. As Frédéric reaches a low point,
					Flaubert describes a haunting street scene complete with glowing
					gas lamps, shadows, slimy pavement, a mist, and darkness. Frédéric
					himself has become part of this bleak Parisian landscape.

Frédéric attempts to use art as a way of lifting him out
					of his depression, but his efforts fail. He tries to write a novel,
					but he gets discouraged at its lack of originality. He rents a piano
					and composes German waltzes, but this doesn’t help either. He attends
					the theater, but this only serves to agitate him more: this is where
					he spots Arnoux and suspects (incorrectly) that Madame Arnoux has
					died. No matter what strategies he tries, he fails to lighten his
					psychological load. In the absence of a passion for anything at
					all, even his interest in Madame Arnoux starts to disappear.

Frédéric’s chance meeting with Hussonnet sets his life
					on a new path and lifts him out of his bleak depression. The world
					of Madame Arnoux, which had seemed permanently closed to him, suddenly
					reopens at the news that Hussonnet has worked for Arnoux on his
					magazine. Seizing the moment with an energy that had been dormant,
					Frédéric ingratiates himself with Hussonnet and wrangles an invitation
					to Arnoux’s home. Until now, Frédéric has been idle, flitting from
					one activity to the next and discarding one unsatisfactory endeavor
					after another. He has lacked focus and drive. With Hussonnet, however,
					and in the evenings at the Arnoux residence that follow, Frédéric
					displays a singular drive and vision: he wants to see Madame Arnoux
					again, and this desire sustains him. He defends Arnoux against detractors
					and is rewarded—finally—with a dinner invitation that gives him
					his second face-to-face encounter with Madame Arnoux.

