Still reeling from Lolita’s kiss, Humbert is handed a
					note by the maid, Louise. Charlotte Haze has written him a letter,
					confessing her love for him and asking that he leave—unless he reciprocates
					the feeling and marries her. Humbert goes into Lolita’s room and
					looks at the clippings on the wall. One of the men in the pictures
					resembles Humbert, and Lolita has written “H. H.” on it. 

Humbert considers marrying Charlotte so he can stay close
					to Lolita. He even toys with the idea of giving both mother and
					daughter sleeping pills in order to fondle Lolita. He would stop
					short, he thinks, of having sex with the girl. Humbert decides to
					marry Charlotte and calls the summer camp to tell her. However,
					Charlotte has already left, and he reaches Lolita instead. He informs
					her that he plans to marry her mother. Lolita seems distracted and
					not particularly interested—she has already forgotten about Humbert
					at camp. However, Humbert believes he will win her back after the
					wedding. He makes himself a drink and waits for Charlotte to return.

Charlotte and Humbert become lovers and start planning
					the wedding. Charlotte quizzes him on whether he’s a good Christian
					and says she will commit suicide if he isn’t. Charlotte enjoys the
					prestige of being engaged to Humbert and waits on him hand and foot. Humbert
					states that he actually enjoys some aspects of the affair and that
					it seems to improve Charlotte’s looks. Humbert tells himself that
					this helps him get as close as possible to Lolita. Charlotte responds
					to the engagement by becoming highly social and redecorating the
					house. Charlotte doesn’t have very many close friends besides John
					and Jean Farlow, whose niece, Rosaline, goes to school with Lolita. 

Humbert describes Charlotte further and mentions that
					she is about to suffer a bad accident. Humbert finds Charlotte extremely
					jealous, as she asks him to confess all his previous relationships
					and mistresses. Humbert makes up some stories to satisfy her romantic notions.
					He grows used to Charlotte, but her constant criticism of Lolita
					still secretly upsets him.

Charlotte and Humbert go to the nearby lake in the last
					week of summer. Charlotte confesses that she wants to get a real
					maid and send Lolita off to boarding school. Humbert seethes quietly
					but, afraid of repeating his experience with Valeria, doesn’t want
					to intimidate her. He considers killing her there at the lake but
					cannot bring himself to do so. Jean and John Farlow join them, and
					Jean tells of seeing two young people embracing by the water. She
					starts to tell a story of Ivor Quilty’s nephew but gets interrupted. 

Humbert tries the silent treatment on Charlotte, to no
					effect. However, when she decides they will go to England in the
					fall, Humbert argues against it, and she immediately becomes contrite
					for making plans without him. Regaining some control in the relationship pleases
					Humbert. Charlotte tries to be near him as much as possible and
					mentions going to stay at a hotel called the Enchanted Hunters. She
					wonders why he locks the small table in his study. Humbert teases
					her by saying it contains love letters. Later, Humbert worries whether
					the table’s key remains secure in its hiding place.

Charlotte informs Humbert that Lolita can only begin attending boarding
					school in January. Meanwhile, Humbert visits a doctor and pretends
					to have insomnia, in order to procure stronger sleeping pills to
					use on Lolita and Charlotte. When he returns from the appointment,
					he finds that Charlotte has broken into the table in his study and
					found the journal in which he details his lust for Lolita. Bitterly
					angry, she threatens to leave with Lolita, having already written
					some letters. Humbert goes into the kitchen to mix a drink and decides
					to tell Charlotte that the journal was merely part of a novel he’s
					working on. Just as he finishes the drink, the phone rings, and
					a man informs Humbert that Charlotte has been run over by a car. 

A combination of melodramatic gestures, laughable attempts
					at world-weary refinement, and sincere, naked emotion, Charlotte’s letter
					to Humbert provides insight into both the woman she really is and
					the woman she would like to be. The letter also predicts the future
					in some uncanny ways. In the letter, Charlotte mentions that while
					Humbert is reading her letter, she’ll probably be speeding home
					in her car and risking an accident, a fate she does indeed suffer at
					the end of Chapter 22. Similarly, she tells Humbert that if he tries to
					seduce her without reciprocating her genuine affection, he would be
					worse than a kidnapper who rapes a child, which Humbert will indeed
					become. Surprisingly, the letter also highlights certain shared characteristics
					between Charlotte and Humbert. Even as he scoffs at it, the passionate
					prose and uncontrolled emotion of Charlotte’s letter echoes Humbert’s
					own rhapsodizing of Lolita, though much less skillfully. Both Charlotte
					and Humbert are propelled by their own poetic, romantic fantasies,
					rather than a genuine connection to the people they profess to adore.
					When Charlotte discovers Humbert’s secret, for example, she feels
					jealous that Humbert would prefer Lolita to herself. The fact that
					an adult man yearns to molest her daughter seems to be of far less
					consequence to her. Like Humbert, Charlotte is blinded by a passion
					that seems more directed at herself than the people around her.

Through Charlotte and her reactions to the impending marriage, Nabokov
					mocks the bourgeois values of American domesticity. Despite her
					attempts at sophistication, Charlotte’s preoccupations before and
					after her marriage show the power of her middle-class sensibilities.
					First, she must assure herself of Humbert’s religious faith, which
					she mistakenly sees as a sign of his good character. She devotes
					herself to becoming a prominent member of the community by holding
					tea parties and garnering mentions in the society column. She fervently
					cleans and redecorates the house according to rules and tips she
					finds in catalogues and decorating manuals. With these efforts,
					Charlotte attempts to create an air of respectability about her,
					befitting society’s expectations for the satisfied wife of a prominent
					man. Humbert describes the town of Ramsdale as idyllic and as artificially
					peaceful as a town depicted on sitcoms. Under the surface, however,
					dark emotions prevail, and despite Charlotte’s attempt to remake
					her life in the image of a perfect, American nuclear family, the
					façade soon crumbles.

In these chapters, McFate—the particularly American mix
					of chance, destiny, and coincidence that Humbert distinguishes as
					a guiding force in his life—seems to show its hand with increasing
					frequency. At the same time, in its seemingly anarchic unpredictability, McFate
					serves as a counterpoint to the characters’ grander attempts at
					finding systematic meaning in their lives. For example, Charlotte demands
					that Humbert “erase” his past romances so that nothing can obstruct
					his affection for her, the woman destined to be his soulmate. However,
					in bringing Humbert to Charlotte, McFate has also brought Lolita
					to Humbert, and the girl will eventually displace Charlotte and
					become what Charlotte always wanted to be: the love of Humbert’s
					life. In a particularly cruel twist, McFate will also mercilessly
					dispatch with Charlotte by sending her into the path of an oncoming
					car, conveniently clearing the way for her daughter’s usurpation
					of her place by Humbert’s side. Like many other characters in the
					novel, such as Annabel or Humbert’s mother, Charlotte is killed
					off suddenly and with little fanfare, as if she has fulfilled her purpose
					and become obsolete to the narrative. Considering that Lolita doesn’t
					represent an objective account of the given events, but rather Humbert
					Humbert’s specific, biased view of those events, this harsh summation
					of Charlotte Haze as a one-dimensional composite seems appropriate.
					Though Humbert acknowledges McFate’s capricious nature, he assumes
					that Charlotte’s death has set him free so he can be with Lolita
					forever. Humbert won’t always be able to rely on McFate’s help,
					however, though he will never free himself from its influence.

Though he continually attempts to justify himself to us,
					the readers of Lolita, Humbert’s cunning and deceitful
					nature hampers our ability to trust him fully. More than once, Humbert
					has proven himself willing to create fictional accounts in order
					to satisfy the public. He lies in his career, such as with his phony
					Arctic report, and to those trying to help him, such as the doctors
					in the sanitarium. Of course, he must constantly create fictions
					in order to distract others from his pedophilia. When Charlotte
					attempts the grand, romantic gesture of “erasing” their past loves,
					Humbert’s willingness to invent a past yet again indicates his unreliability
					as a narrator. Humbert’s deception represents one more kind of game-playing
					in Lolita, and we must question whether his willingness
					to lie to other characters in the novel extends to a willingness
					to lie to us. If we as readers truly are Humbert’s jury, as he himself
					calls us, than we should bear in mind that this book represents
					not just a confession—as the subtitle, Confession of a White
						Widowed Male, suggests—but also a potential attempt to
					sway our judgment and soften our harsh critique of a confessed pedophile,
					rapist, and murderer. 

