Following Abraham’s death, God reveals to Isaac’s wife
					Rebekah that she will soon give birth to two sons who will represent
					two nations, one stronger than the other. When Rebekah delivers,
					Esau is born first and is extremely hairy. Jacob, who is smooth
					skinned, is born immediately after, grasping the heel of his brother.
					Isaac’s two sons grow to be opposites. Esau is a hunter and a brash
					man. Jacob stays at home, soft-spoken but quick-witted. One day,
					Esau comes home famished, demanding to be fed, and agrees to give
					Jacob his inheritance rights in exchange for a bowl of soup.

Like his own father, Isaac prospers in Canaan
					and, despite occasional errors in judgment, enlarges his property,
					making alliances with area rulers and continuing to erect monuments
					to God. One day, when he is old and blind, Isaac instructs Esau
					to catch some game and prepare him a meal so that he may give the
					elder son his blessing. While Esau is gone, Rebekah helps Jacob
					deceive his father, preparing a separate meal and disguising the
					younger son with hairy arms and Esau’s clothing. When Jacob presents
					Isaac with the meal, Isaac—smelling Esau’s clothing and feeling
					the hairy body—proceeds to bless Jacob, promising him the inheritance
					of God’s covenant and a greater status than his brother. Esau returns
					to discover the deception, but it is too late. Isaac, though dismayed,
					says that he cannot revoke the stolen blessing.

Jacob flees in fear of Esau, traveling to the
					house of his uncle Laban in upper Mesopotamia. En route, Jacob dreams
					of a stairway leading up to heaven, where angels and God reside.
					In the dream, God promises Jacob the same covenant he previously
					made with Abraham and Isaac. Jacob arrives at Laban’s house, where
					he agrees to work for his uncle in exchange for the hand of Laban’s
					daughter, Rachel, in marriage. Laban deceives Jacob into marrying
					Leah, Rachel’s older sister, before marrying Rachel. The two wives
					compete for Jacob’s favor and, along with their maids, give birth
					to eleven sons and a daughter.

After twenty years, Jacob heeds God’s urging and leaves
					to return to Canaan, taking his family, his flocks, and Laban’s
					collection of idols, or miniature representations of gods. Rachel,
					who has stolen the idolic figurines from her father, hides them
					under her skirt when Laban tracks down the fleeing clan in the desert.
					Unable to procure his belongings, Laban settles his differences
					with Jacob, who erects a pillar of stone as a “witness” to God of
					their peaceful resolution (31:48).
					Jacob continues on and, nearing home, fears an encounter with Esau.
					Jacob prepares gifts to appease his brother and, dividing his family
					and belongings into two camps, spends the night alone on the river
					Jabbok. Jacob meets God, who, disguised as a man, physically wrestles
					with Jacob until dawn. Jacob demands a blessing from his opponent,
					and the man blesses Jacob by renaming him “Israel,” meaning, “he
					struggles with God.”

The next morning, Jacob meets Esau, who welcomes his
					brother with open arms. Jacob resettles in Shechem, not far from
					Esau, who has intermarried with the Canaanites and produced a tribe
					called the Edomites. Jacob and his sons prosper in peace until one
					day Jacob’s daughter, Dinah, is raped by a man from Shechem. Enraged, Jacob’s
					sons say they will let the Shechemite marry Dinah if all the members
					of the man’s family will be circumcised. The man agrees and, while
					the greater part of his village is healing from the surgical procedure,
					Jacob’s sons take revenge and attack the Shechemites, killing all
					the men. Isaac and Rachel die soon thereafter.

Jacob’s sons grow jealous of their youngest brother,
					Joseph, who is Jacob’s favorite son. When Jacob presents Joseph
					with a beautiful, multi-colored coat, the eleven elder brothers
					sell Joseph into slavery, telling their father that Joseph is dead.
					Joseph is sold to Potiphar, a high-ranking official in Egypt, who
					favors the boy greatly until, one day, Potiphar’s flirtatious wife
					accuses Joseph of trying to sleep with her. Potiphar throws Joseph
					in prison, but—ever faithful to God—Joseph earns a reputation as
					an interpreter of dreams. Years pass until the Pharaoh of Egypt,
					bothered by two troublesome dreams, hears of Joseph and his abilities.
					Pharaoh summons Joseph, who successfully interprets the dreams,
					warning Pharaoh that a great famine will strike Egypt after seven
					years. Impressed, Pharaoh elects Joseph to be his highest official,
					and Joseph leads a campaign throughout Egypt to set aside food in
					preparation for the famine.

Famine eventually plagues the land and, learning of the
					Egyptian supply of grain, Joseph’s brothers go to Egypt to purchase
					food. The eleven men present themselves to Joseph, who recognizes
					them immediately but refrains from revealing his identity. Joseph
					toys with his brothers to test their good will, first throwing them
					in jail and then sending them back to Canaan to retrieve their newest brother,
					Benjamin. They return with the boy, and Joseph continues his game,
					planting a silver cup in the boy’s satchel and threatening to kill
					the boy when the cup is discovered. When Judah offers his own life
					in exchange for Benjamin’s, Joseph reveals his identity. Joseph persuades
					his brothers to return to Egypt with Jacob, who, overjoyed, moves
					to Egypt with his family of seventy.

As Jacob approaches death, he promises Joseph that the
					covenant will pass on through Joseph and his two sons, Manasseh
					and Ephraim. However, when Jacob places his hands on the two boys
					to bless them, he crosses his arms, placing his right hand on Ephraim, the
					younger son. Joseph protests, but Jacob says that Ephraim will be
					greater than Manasseh. Jacob dies soon thereafter and, accompanied
					by Egyptians, Joseph buries his father in Canaan. They return to
					Egypt, where Jacob’s descendants, the Israelite people, grow rapidly.
					Joseph eventually dies, instructing his family to return one day to
					the land God has promised to give to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

The division of the world into binary opposites, initiated
					with the creation story, dominates the latter half of Genesis. Just
					as light absolutely opposes darkness and male absolutely opposes
					female in the creation story, Esau and Jacob are diametrically opposed
					in everything from their appearance to their occupations and behavior. Rachel
					and Leah constitute another pair of binary opposites, struggling
					with each other for Jacob’s affections. Oppositions continue, not
					only between Joseph’s sons, Ephraim and Mannasseh, but with other,
					more intangible elements, such as the wrestling match between God
					and man, the contrast between abundance and famine in Egypt, and
					the decidedly joyful welcome of Esau after Jacob’s expectations
					of a violent homecoming. Alongside the motif of opposites runs a
					motif of substitution or crossing; Jacob is blessed instead of Esau,
					and Jacob himself crosses his arms when he blesses Joseph’s sons,
					bestowing the higher blessing on the younger son.

These opposing elements generate both irony and radical
					reversals in the stories of Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph. Esau does
					not merely receive a lesser blessing because Jacob steals his inheritance
					but is actually cursed to serve his younger brother forever, barred
					from the covenant entirely. Characters are increasingly tricky or
					deceptive in these stories, and their skill at deception usually
					earns them praise and privilege rather than punishment. Jacob deceives
					Esau, and as a result becomes the founder of one of the greatest
					nations in the Old Testament. Laban deceives Jacob, and receives
					twice as many years of service from him as a result. Rachel hides
					her father’s idols under her dress, and Jacob’s sons murderously
					trick the Shechemites. The most interesting deception, on a literary
					level, is Joseph’s decision to veil his identity from his brothers.
					The elaborate deception builds in suspense over four chapters, as
					the narrative does not make it clear whether Joseph plans to enact
					revenge or simply to scare his brothers. When Judah offers to give
					his life for Benjamin, and Joseph forgives his brothers, trickery
					is replaced by the possibility of redemption, foreshadowing God’s
					plan to reverse the Israelites’ fortune with a promise of abundance
					in a new land.

Joseph plays a game of punishment and redemption with
					his brothers, and God plays the same game with the whole of humanity throughout
					Genesis. God creates a realm of opposing forces, symbols, and reversals
					to suggest a pattern of how and through whom his covenant will be
					revealed. The game is in the foreground, while God and his reasons
					for playing the game move into the background of the Genesis narrative.
					The game becomes literal rather than figurative when God wrestles
					Jacob by the Jabbok River. The event is a metaphor for how God conveys
					his promise to humankind in the second half of Genesis. Just as
					the mysterious man never identifies himself to Jacob, so God recedes
					further and further from humankind. Jacob, however, is able to see
					past his opponent’s bodily appearance because he is persistent and
					faithful, eventually able to wrest a blessing from this obscured
					manifestation of God. The giving of the name “Israel” to Jacob not
					only commemorates this specific struggle but also commemorates the
					struggle of the Israelites with an unseen God. Joseph, the ancestor
					of the Israelites, never has an explicit conversation with God,
					yet he notes in the final chapter of Genesis that the happy outcome
					of the first trick his brothers play on him has helped to save many
					lives in Egypt. The experience of Joseph and Jacob shows that God’s
					covenant is fulfilled largely through the act of struggling.

