Yolanda tells the story, in the first person, of how for
					a few years she was the wildest one of her sisters. In high school
					she was vivacious, and had a lot of callers, though no serious relationships.
					In college, however, she could not keep the callers interested for
					long, since she refused to sleep with any of them. She went to college
					during the late sixties and the sexual revolution. She insists that
					she was Americanized enough not to be concerned with her Dominican
					Catholicism, so she did not have a good excuse for her prudishness.

In her first English class, she met Rudy Brodermann Elmenhurst, the
					third. Yolanda felt out of place and foreign, and appreciated Rudy's
					odd name, his lateness, and his acne scars. He had "bedroom eyes,"
					was able to laugh at himself, and did not bring a pen to class. She
					felt a shiver of sexual chemistry as he asked her if she had an extra
					one. Yolanda did not have an extra pen, and felt awkward while explaining
					this in a whisper. But she handed him a small red pencil inscribed
					with the Americanized version of her name, Jolinda. The pencil had
					been sharpened down to the J, and Yolanda was embarrassed that she
					had saved the pencil for such a long time.

That night, Rudy stopped by her room as Yolanda was reciting
					a love sonnet she had written for class. He claimed he only wanted
					to return her tiny pencil, but then asked her out to lunch. Yolanda
					was confused but agreed to have lunch anyway. They had lunch and
					then also had dinner, because they became so absorbed in each other. They
					wrote a pornographic poem together, and Rudy explained all the sexual
					double meanings found within images of nature. Yolanda was a very
					innocent virgin and did not understand Rudy's strategies of flirtation.
					He would linger in her room late at night before kissing her goodbye
					behind her ear.

Yolanda felt that her innocence regarding sex and drugs
					was related to her situation as an immigrant. The boys' dorm rooms hosted
					parties with drugs and alcohol, and Yolanda was afraid that Rudy
					would take advantage of her if she drank or smoked marijuana. She
					told him she was afraid he might rape her, and his explicit language
					shocked her when he denied it. They would kiss and cuddle, but she
					refused to let him touch her. He would get frustrated with her "hangups,"
					and Yolanda would get disgusted by the language he used to describe
					sex. Yolanda feared pregnancy and also the possibility of being
					frigid.

She felt ashamed of her uptight and formal Old World parents and
					envied his parents' relaxed attitude toward sex. Rudy thought sex
					should be fun and she thought it should be meaningful and serious.
					She stormed out of his room one night and put a crucifix under her
					pillow for comfort. After they broke up, Yolanda missed Rudy and
					noticed his poems were more explicitly affectionate. Yolanda fantasized
					about Rudy coming back to her during the spring dance. But Rudy
					brought another girl to the dance and Yolanda could tell by looking
					at the way they interacted that they were sexually intimate.

Five years later, while Yolanda was in grad school and
					finally sexually experienced, Rudy stopped by unexpectedly. He asked
					if she wanted "to fuck" and she got offended and threw him out.
					She messily uncorked his expensive bottle of wine and drank it from
					the bottle like "some decadent wild woman who had just dismissed
					an unsatisfactory lover."

The roots of Yolanda's problems with American men, from
					Rudy all the way through to John, relate to the cultural differences
					between Dominican and American attitudes toward sex and relationships. Her
					fears of intimacy and sexual experimentation relate to her desires
					to be appreciated and cherished as a pure and chaste virgin. Though
					tempted by the mystery and pleasure of sex that Rudy seems to offer,
					she is also terrified by the disrespect communicated through his
					crude vocabulary.

Yolanda places such importance on the hidden and subtle
					meanings of words and language that she is easily offended by what
					she feels is an inappropriate and crass way of talking about sex.
					If Rudy had framed sex in terms of poetic romance, she might have
					given in more easily to his advances. Because he talked about sex
					using a distinctively American vocabulary, such as "laid," "balled,"
					or "fucked," and used American slang like "69,"
					Yolanda could not relate to his perspective on sex. She cannot think
					of sex in the same ways that Americans did in the late sixties,
					as a fun and harmless experience. She continues to see it in many
					ways as her parents did, as a symbol of a long term and spiritual
					commitment to another person. Yet the casual attitude that she finds
					so offensive is what originally attracted her to Rudy in the first
					place. She feels caught between the Dominican culture she finds
					too oppressive and the American culture she finds too casual.

The conclusion confirms that Rudy is a selfish and insensitive person,
					especially after having had some time to possibly mature. Though
					Yolanda experiments with sex during the years following her relationship
					with Rudy, she retains her insistence that a lover respect her attitudes
					toward sex and frame desire within a vocabulary that she finds attractive
					and respectful. She seems to have overcome some of her insecurities
					regarding her frigidity, since she sees herself as a wild woman,
					drinking alcohol and defining the boundaries and characteristics
					of her sexual relationships.

