“I would have things as they were in
						all the days of my life . . . and in the days of my longfathers
						before me. . . . But if doom denies this to me, then I will have
						naught: neither life diminished, nor love halved, nor honour abated.”

The narrative returns to the perspective of Pippin. When
					the Black Captain disappears from the gate of Minas Tirith, Pippin
					runs to Gandalf and tells him of Denethor’s madness and the situation
					in the tower. Gandalf wishes to pursue the Nazgûl but knows he must
					save Faramir. As they race to the Citadel, Gandalf laments the Enemy’s ability
					to bring evil and discord to the inner circle of Minas Tirith. Reaching
					the door to the House of Stewards, the two find Denethor’s servants
					bearing swords and torches, standing before the lone figure of Beregond,
					who holds the door against them. Two servants have already fallen
					to Beregond’s sword. The men cower at the sight of Gandalf, whose
					appearance is like a burst of white light.

Denethor throws open the door, drawing his sword, but
					Gandalf lifts his hand and the sword flies from Denethor’s grip.
					The wizard decries Denethor’s madness, but the Steward says that
					Faramir has already burned. Rushing past, Gandalf finds Faramir
					still alive on the funeral pyre. To Denethor’s protests and tears,
					Gandalf lifts Faramir and carries him away with a strength that
					surprises Pippin. Denethor, the wizard says, does not have the authority
					to order Faramir’s death.

Denethor laughs. Standing proudly, he produces from his
					cloak a palantír, similar to the Stone of Orthanc.
					He warns that the West is doomed, as he has foreseen the black ships
					of the Enemy approaching. The Steward condemns Gandalf for bringing
					a young upstart Ranger to replace him as ruler. Denethor wishes
					that things would remain as they always have been in Minas Tirith.
					He springs for Faramir, but Beregond stops him. Grabbing a torch
					from a servant, Denethor lights the funeral pyre. He throws himself
					into the raging fire, clutching the palantír.

Gandalf and Beregond carry Faramir to the Houses of Healing. As
					they exit, the House of Stewards collapses in flames, and Denethor’s
					servants run out. Soon after, they hear a great cry from the battlefield—the
					sound of Éowyn and Merry’s defeat of the Lord of the Nazgûl. A sense
					of hope returns as the sun breaks through the Darkness. Gandalf
					discusses Denethor’s palantír with Pippin and Beregond.
					Gandalf says he had always suspected that the Steward possessed
					one of the seven seeing-stones. The wizard surmises that Denethor,
					in his growing distress, began to use the stone, and through it
					he fell prey to the lies of Sauron.

Crying and in pain, Merry accompanies the procession carrying Théoden
					and Éowyn into the city. As Merry ascends the city roads, he runs
					into Pippin, who is startled and glad, and notices that Merry is
					stumbling badly. Merry’s arm has gone completely numb after he stabbed
					the Nazgûl. Pippin escorts Merry to the Houses of Healing.

After the battle, Aragorn furls his banner and orders
					his men to prepare tents outside the city. He refuses to claim his
					throne until the war with Mordor is decided, for good or ill. Aragorn
					plans to wait outside the gate until the Lord of Minas Tirith bids
					him to enter. Aragorn, learning of Denethor’s fate, assigns Imrahil
					to act as the interim leader of Gondor. Aragorn, Éomer, and Imrahil
					secretly agree, though, that Gandalf is their true leader for the
					remainder of the war against Mordor.

At Gandalf’s request, Aragorn enters the city in the guise
					of a Ranger. The wounded, including Merry, Faramir, and Éowyn, grow steadily
					sicker from the poison of the Enemy’s weapons. One of the city’s
					nurses recalls a legend of Gondor, which says, “The hands of the
					king are the hands of a healer, and so shall the rightful king be known.”
					Only Aragorn can save those wounded by the Enemy.

Aragorn crushes the leaves of a common, seemingly useless
					herb that grows in Gondor and stirs the leaves in a bowl of warm
					water. The sweet scent of the herb awakens Faramir from his fever.
					Faramir immediately affirms Aragorn as his superior and king. Aragorn
					then tends to Éowyn and Merry, who both return to consciousness
					when Aragorn touches and kisses them. All through the night, Aragorn heals
					the wounded of the city. Rumors fly throughout the city that the
					King of Gondor now walks again, bringing healing in his hands. As
					foretold at Aragorn’s birth, the people call him Elfstone, or Elessar,
					after the green gem that he wears around his neck, which Galadriel
					gave to him earlier.

The pall of Lord Denethor’s suicide looms over these chapters, despite
					the arrival of Aragorn and the victory over the Black Captain. Tolkien
					places Denethor in sharp contrast to each of the West’s other three
					prominent leaders—Théoden, Gandalf, and Aragorn. As Chapters 6 and 7 take
					place at the same time, though from different perspectives, Denethor
					and Théoden perish at the same moment. Gandalf and Beregond hear
					the cries of the Black Captain just as the House of Stewards crumbles
					in flames; Pippin watches Denethor place himself on the burning
					pyre just as Théoden prepares to speak his final words to Merry.
					The parallels between the two rulers show them to be true foils,
					or counterpoints. Théoden dies sprinting ahead of his men into battle,
					effectively drawing the attention of the Lord of the Nazgûl and
					allowing for Éowyn to strike down the Black Captain. Denethor, in
					contrast, removes himself from his people, withdrawing into isolation
					in the Citadel, high above the erupting conflict. Théoden displays
					the sort of forward movement necessary to lead and to improve the
					welfare of his kingdom, whereas Denethor’s passiveness and self-involvement
					parallel the recent decay of Minas Tirith.

The scene just before Denethor’s suicide is the third
					major confrontation between the Steward and Gandalf and it highlights
					the contrast between the two men. Pippin has been unable to understand
					the tension between Gandalf and Denethor since their first meeting.
					The hobbit even questions Gandalf’s role, wondering what purpose
					or good Gandalf’s wizardry serves in the broader scheme of Middle-earth.
					The wizard’s role is clarified in his final standoff with Denethor.
					Gandalf’s virtue as a wizard lies less in his mystical powers or
					even his sage-like wisdom than in his ability to perceive possibilities
					for change in each individual and extend charity in turn. Just as
					Gandalf offers Théoden forgiveness and redemption for the King’s
					former misdeeds, so he offers counsel and a second chance to Denethor.
					Before Denethor commits suicide, Gandalf beckons to him, “Come!
					We are needed. There is much that you can yet do.” Denethor, however,
					is a politician crippled by the weight of necessity; after years
					of pressure from Mordor on Minas Tirith, he feels that a hopeful
					solution for the West is impossible. While Denethor remains strong
					enough to resist Sauron’s will, he does succumb to Sauron’s lies
					through his use of the palantír. Whereas Gandalf
					is the paragon of wisdom, Denethor gains only knowledge—not wisdom—from
					the palantír. The sphere offers the Steward prescient images,
					such as that of the ships of the Enemy approaching, but it provides
					no explanation for these images. Denethor misinterprets the knowledge
					imparted to him by the palantír, thinking that
					the ships of the Enemy foretell the doom of Minas Tirith, when in
					reality the ships herald the arrival of Aragorn. In this regard,
					Denethor falls prey to his inability to distinguish between knowledge
					and wisdom—a distinction that characters such as Gandalf and Elrond make,
					and that Tolkien implies is crucial.

Aragorn also contrasts with Denethor, not as the Steward’s opposite,
					but as a fulfillment of that which the Steward has failed to achieve.
					Aragorn enjoys a birthright to the throne, while Denethor struggles
					to retain the line of the Stewards—the interim leaders in Gondor.
					Aragorn has not only resisted Sauron’s lies through the palantír, but
					he has also subordinated the power of the seeing-stone to his will.
					Finally, in Chapter 8, Aragorn emerges as
					the redeemer of Minas Tirith. Under Denethor, the city suffers decay
					analogous to the debilitated condition of its ruler. Aragorn, in
					contrast, brings renewed life to the city. Not only does he defeat
					the armies of Mordor, but he heals the wounded and the dying with
					his touch and presence. Once again, Aragorn fulfills the role of
					a Christ figure. He is perhaps the complete opposite of Denethor,
					who, rather than giving life to others, takes his own life and attempts
					to take the life of his son, Faramir. Aragorn’s claim to the throne
					is finally manifest when Faramir wakes from his fever and immediately
					pronounces Aragorn king.

