But what can you do when you have to
						deal with people?

The reconstruction of the Rio Norte Line is plagued with
					problems, but Dagny and Rearden manage to keep the project on schedule through
					quick and decisive actions. Ellis Wyatt appears at the Rio Norte
					construction site, where he has been helping out behind the scenes.
					His appreciative tone with Dagny acknowledges that she is as driven
					and focused as he is. Dagny is relieved to also find Rearden at
					the site. He proposes replacing an old bridge in Colorado with one
					made entirely of Rearden Metal. Dagny approves his bold plan. 

Back in New York, Dagny orders a cup of coffee
					at a diner. A man sitting next to her complains that there is no
					human spirit, that men are concerned only with satisfying their
					bodies’ needs. Another man shrugs off the importance of morality.
					“Who is John Galt?” he says with a sneer. At this, a small, shriveled
					tramp declares that he knows. John Galt was a great explorer who found
					the fountain of youth. 

Dr. Potter, from the State Science Institute, comes to
					see Rearden and tells him that society is not ready for Rearden
					Metal. He says that Rearden’s company might harm his competitors
					by producing too much and asks Rearden to wait a few years before
					producing his metal. When Rearden refuses, Potter offers to buy
					all rights to his metal, at any price. Rearden refuses. Potter tells
					him that there are certain bills pending in the legislature that
					make businessmen particularly vulnerable. The threat is clear. Later,
					the State Science Institute issues a formal warning about Rearden
					Metal. The statement lacks any scientific basis but hints at possible
					dangers. In response to the denunciation, Taggart stock crashes;
					Ben Nealy, the Taggart contractor, quits; the Brotherhood of Road
					and Track Workers forbids its members to work with the metal; and
					Jim leaves town. 

Visiting the State Science Institute in New
					Hampshire, Dagny finds that Dr. Stadler, at one time the greatest
					scientist in the country, is completely disillusioned. He agrees
					that the metal is a great discovery but says the Institute will
					not support it. Despite spending millions, the Institute’s metallurgists
					have failed to discover anything as valuable, and they are afraid
					to draw attention to the fact that a private citizen succeeded where
					a government-funded institution failed. 

When Dagny finds Jim, he is desperate. He wants to save
					the railroad but has no idea what to do. Dagny tells him she will
					finish the line on her own. Because everyone is afraid of Rearden
					Metal, she will resign and start her own company. After she proves
					that the metal works, she will return to Taggart and bring her line
					with her. She will name her company the John Galt Line. Dagny goes
					to Francisco d’Anconia for money, but he refuses to help and expresses shock
					at her name for the line. Dagny finds the investors she needs among
					the industrialists of Colorado. Rearden also invests. 

The Legislature passes the Equalization of Opportunity
					Bill, which will force Rearden to give up his mines. Wesley Mouch
					had not informed Rearden that the bill was being considered, and
					he cannot be reached by phone. 

Contradictions do not exist. Whenever
						you think that you are facing a contradiction, check your premises. You
						will find that one of them is wrong.

Rearden sells his ore mines to Paul Larkin
					and his coal mines to Ken Dannager, a self-made businessman from
					Pennsylvania. With the money from these sales, Rearden offers Taggart
					a moratorium on its debt to Rearden Steel. He knows that Taggart
					is having financial problems, and he wants the company to survive long
					enough to be his long-term customers. Rearden still cannot reach
					Wesley Mouch. He reads in the papers that Mouch has been appointed
					assistant coordinator of the Bureau of Economic Planning and National
					Resources. 

As the date of the line’s opening approaches, public criticism grows
					steadily louder. But when Dagny asks for volunteers to run the first
					train, every engineer at the company offers. Dagny holds a press
					conference in her office in which she proudly states that she expects
					to make a huge profit, and many are amazed at her admitted self-interest.
					Dagny and Rearden ride together in the engine of the first locomotive
					to ride the John Galt Line. The first run is a resounding success,
					spreading a mood of optimism and possibility among those who witness
					it. People line up all along the route, thrilled to finally have
					something to celebrate. Despite dire predictions, the bridge made
					of Rearden Metal holds up well. That night, at Ellis Wyatt’s house,
					Dagny and Rearden make love for the first time. 

Rand’s heroes are bold and decisive, just as their enemies
					are soft and wavering. Acting with clarity and self-assurance, Dagny
					and Rearden expertly handle the rebuilding of the Rio Norte Line,
					even in the face of dramatic setbacks. They rely on facts alone
					to make decisions. Dagny agrees to build a bridge made of Rearden
					Metal because she knows the the metal’s value will speak for itself.
					In contrast, Jim is paralyzed by public opinion. He has no rational
					judgment of his own but assumes that if “everyone” thinks something, they
					must be right. When Dagny boldly decides to build her own line as
					the only way to get it done, she demonstrates the creative power of
					the individual against the destructive power of the state. She knows
					she is right, and this is all the validation she requires. The second
					John Galt story shows him to be bold and heroic as well. Here he
					is credited with finding the fountain of youth. But what makes a person
					young and vital or old and wasted? In Rand’s work, the physical
					descriptions of characters offer some clues. The industrialists,
					who use their minds as motive power and find joy in producing, are
					described as young, attractive, and vital, while the looters and moochers
					are dour, sullen, and formless. The fountain of youth in this context
					refers to the vitality of producing. 

Rand demonstrates her belief that socialism destroys innovation by
					having the State Science Institute denounce Rearden Metal. When
					the state controls scientific development, it will be hesitant to allow
					private discoveries to come to light if they are seen as competition.
					State control of research and development not only slows the pace
					of innovation, but throws open the possibility of corruption and
					misuse of resources to further the political power of the state. Dr.
					Stadler embodies the disillusionment that results when the scientific
					mind is given over to the state. As a scientist, he should be devoted
					to the truth, but his priority has become political expediency.
					Although he knows that the State Science Institute’s smear campaign
					against Rearden Metal is fabricated, he will do nothing about it
					for fear of risking his clout and the government funding on which
					he depends. In one of the classic paradoxes of socialism, a great
					scientific mind becomes employed in hindering the progress of science. 

In Rand’s view, when the government controls the economy,
					corruption and mediocrity are inevitable. Since the state has the
					power to grant economic favors, it naturally attracts those who
					seek to profit from them. People who cannot succeed in open competition find
					ways to rise once competitive barriers are artificially removed. Wesley
					Mouch is a significant character only in the sense that he is insignificant,
					a nobody able to rise through favors and manipulation instead of
					skill and hard work. In contrast, the success of the new John Galt
					Line is the triumph of hard work over mediocrity and of individual
					ambition over government barriers. Dagny and Rearden’s first sexual
					encounter is also a manifestation of triumph. Their shared values
					and commitment to quality and truth have made the John Galt Line
					possible. Their joy is made physical in a natural, inevitable way.

