Sir Aglovale returns to Camelot and swears revenge on
					the Orkney faction for having killed his brother Lamorak. Arthur
					convinces Aglovale that the only way to stop the bloodshed is for
					him to give up on revenge. Aglovale tells Arthur about the adventures
					of his youngest brother, Sir Percival, who is also a holy knight
					like Galahad. Percival has some adventures in a magical forest and
					then boards a magical barge with Sir Bors and Sir Galahad. In the
					barge, they are joined by Percival’s sister, a holy nun. On their
					search for the Holy Grail, the three knights get into a fight with
					a group of men and slaughter them. Galahad tells them the slaughter
					is not sinful, since the murdered men were not christened. They
					then come to another castle, where Percival’s sister sacrifices
					her life to save a woman with a fatal disease. After telling his
					stories, Aglovale asks Arthur to invite the Orkneys to dinner on
					his behalf.

Other returning knights bring contradicting rumors about
					the adventures of Bors, Percival, and Galahad. Rumors fly that Lancelot has
					died or gone mad. Guenever becomes less cautious, and Mordred and
					Agravaine wait eagerly for her to reveal her affair. Lancelot returns
					to Camelot exhausted but sane. Uncle Dap tells Arthur that Lancelot
					has been wearing a hair shirt—a painful way of doing penance for
					one’s sins.

The next day, Lancelot tells Arthur and Guenever the story
					of his search for the Holy Grail. Guenever, now forty-two years
					old, has dressed up and put on makeup in an effort to look good
					for Lancelot, and his heart warms at the sight of her. Lancelot
					tells them that he did not find the Holy Grail, which was reserved
					for Galahad. Lancelot also says that if Galahad seems cold, it is
					because he is more angelic than human. Lancelot relates that Galahad
					defeated him in jousting. Lancelot then confessed his sins, which
					he thought would make him the best knight in the world again. But
					he was then beaten by another group of knights, after which he fell
					asleep in a chapel. When he woke up, his sword and armor had been
					taken from him. He then began to wear the hair shirt as penance.
					Thinking he had cleansed himself and could fight as well as he had
					before, Lancelot fought a knight dressed in black but was again
					defeated.

Arthur is outraged that Lancelot, his best knight, has
					been beaten. Lancelot continues with his story: he then got on a
					magic barge, and Galahad soon joined him. Eventually Galahad got
					out to seek the Holy Grail. The barge eventually returned to the
					castle where the Grail was located, and Lancelot was allowed to
					watch Galahad and other holy knights participate in a Mass in a
					chapel that contains the Holy Grail.

Having found God, Lancelot decides to end his affair with
					Guenever, but she is confident he will return to her. The narrator
					explains that Guenever is not an evil seductress, for seductresses
					usually leave men hollow, while both the men that Guenever loves
					have accomplished great things.

Guenever’s faith in Lancelot’s love grows weaker as time
					passes. One day, she demands that he go on another quest instead
					of torturing her with his presence. Just as Lancelot has
					decided to give up his abstinence and rekindle his affair with Guenever,
					she leaves the room and refuses to talk to him. He leaves Camelot
					the next morning.

With Lancelot gone, it becomes even clearer
					that Camelot is no longer the place it once was. The best knights
					have either succeeded in finding the Holy Grail or have died. At
					the court, fashions are silly and infidelity is the norm. Mordred
					and his friends now dominate Camelot, and Guenever is widely despised.
					In an attempt to win some popularity, she throws a dinner party
					for the knights and leaves out a tray of apples, Gawaine’s favorite
					fruit. A distant relative of the Pellinores tries to avenge Lamorak’s death
					by poisoning one of the apples, but an innocent knight eats one
					first and dies. Guenever is accused of trying to poison Gawaine.
					Each side picks a champion to fight for their cause. 

Sir Bors agrees, reluctantly, to be Guenever’s champion.
					In the days before the fight, however, he finds Lancelot in a nearby
					abbey. Lancelot takes Bors’s place and easily defeats the knight
					who accused Guenever. He spares the knight’s life, but insists that
					no mention of the incident be made on the poisoned knight’s tombstone.

The episode with Sir Aglovale in Chapter 30 is
					important because it reveals that, even after it has been in place
					for so long, King Arthur’s government still relies on sacrifices
					made for the common good. Arthur has committed himself to a system
					of government that is moral, but he has also inherited a country
					in which wrongs are committed every day and the system of justice
					in place is still not strong enough to deal with all of them. Arthur
					is not yet in a position to punish his strong men, so he must appeal
					to individuals such as Aglovale to forego their vengeance. The old
					system is based on avenging any wrongs that a person commits against
					one’s family. The system is so ingrained that Arthur has to ask
					some of his knights to forgive others’ wrongs against them until
					a new system of justice can be established.

In this section, we also gain a better understanding
					of Guenever. Until now we have seen her as more of a target for
					Lancelot’s affections than an individual in her own right, and the
					portrait of her had previously been more flattering. In these chapters,
					however, Guenever begins to seem like a furtive, jealous, and secretive
					woman. She fears Arthur’s retribution if he finds out
					about her affair, but she nonetheless continues the affair even
					after Lancelot tries to call it off. As her behavior worsens, so
					does her physical appearance, and she begins to use makeup to try
					to keep Lancelot attracted to her. The image of Guenever putting
					on makeup to cover her age suggests that she is trying to hide her
					true, immoral self. The narrator tries to temper such an unattractive
					picture of Guenever by telling us that Arthur is ten years older
					than she and that their marriage was arranged. With this qualifying
					description, we sympathize more with Guenever’s situation, though
					we still do not applaud her lack of morals and honor.

The other major development in these chapters
					is Lancelot’s newfound humility and piety. His failed quest for
					the Holy Grail has taught him that there are some goals that cannot
					be accomplished through skill in battle. Lancelot’s son, Galahad,
					comes to exemplify this new knightly ideal instead. Since he is
					pure, pious, and virginal, only Galahad is able to accomplish the
					quest for the Holy Grail. Even though Galahad is the product of
					a union that was corrupt and dishonorable, he rises to become a
					highly moral figure. White, however, is more interested in humanity
					than in heroism, and he keeps Galahad as a minor character while
					Lancelot remains a pivotal figure. Like Malory, White is principally interested
					in the tragic aspects of King Arthur’s story and in the circumstance
					that bring about the demise of Camelot and England’s golden age.
					Galahad seems fairly cold, and almost inhuman, in his perfection.
					Lancelot, on the other hand, realizes his own mortality and his
					human failings, and sees that he can never reach the sterile perfection
					of his son. Lancelot’s understanding of the limitations of his character
					demonstrates his maturity and humanness.

