Tell man that he must live for others.
						. . . Not a single one of them has ever achieved it and not a single one ever
						will. . . . But don’t you see what you accomplish? . . . He’ll obey.

When most of the work on the Cortlandt project is done,
					Roark agrees to go on a long yacht voyage with Wynand. As Roark
					and Wynand sail, they talk about the true definition of selflessness. Roark
					defines selfless people as “second-handers” who live their lives
					through others. Roark says the greatest enemy of the second-hander
					is an independent spirit.

When Roark returns to New York, he visits the
					Cortlandt construction site and finds that his plans have been altered.
					His substructure remains unchanged, but new features cover the building’s
					façade. Toohey’s protégées secretly made these additions. Keating
					fought desperately to uphold the integrity of the building, but
					the interlopers overwhelmed him. Roark goes to see Dominique and
					asks her to drive past Cortlandt Homes the following Monday. She
					must stop in front of Cortlandt to pretend she is out of gas and
					send the night watchman to a gas station over a mile away. Dominique
					agrees, knowing that Roark only includes her so that she will not
					suffer later.

	Dominique follows Roark’s instructions. She parks in
					front of the Cortlandt building and asks the night watchman to help
					her get gas. When he leaves, Dominique steps outside and
					sees the Cortlandt building explode in a brilliant ball of fire.
					Dominique returns to her car, part of which has been crushed under
					a piece of machinery. She crawls into the front seat and tries to
					make it look like she never left the car by slashing her neck, legs,
					and arms with a splinter of glass. When the police arrive, Dominique
					is unconscious and nearly dead.

Dominique wakes up in Wynand’s penthouse, where Wynand scolds
					her, even though he approves of destroying the building. Wynand
					has not yet guessed the nature of Dominique’s relationship with
					Roark, and she feels sad when she thinks of the pain this will cause
					Wynand. Roark has been arrested for destroying the building. After
					Wynand pays Roark’s bail, Roark comes to visit Dominique. Roark
					says if he is convicted, he wants Dominique to stay with Wynand,
					but if he is acquitted, he wants her to leave Wynand for him. The
					public denounces Roark as the enemy of the poor. Some people speculate
					that Roark was bitter because Keating and Webb borrowed his ideas.
					Wynand orders all of his papers to defend Roark, but the support
					of the Wynand press hurts Roark more than it helps him. Wynand begins
					to realize how thoroughly Toohey has corrupted his organization.

Toohey goes to see Keating, who is hiding from the media.
					Toohey asks Keating to admit that Roark designed the Cortlandt home because
					he thinks this fact will hurt Roark. Keating has become so dependent
					on Toohey that he cannot bear to think about Toohey’s true nature,
					but Toohey forces Keating to understand his evil, explaining that
					he gains power over men by forcing them to join the cult of selflessness.
					Toohey’s speech devastates Keating. He begs Toohey not to leave
					him alone. Toohey laughs.

Toohey publishes a column criticizing Roark, and Wynand
					has Toohey and the editors who approved the column fired. Toohey
					promises Wynand that when he returns, he will own the paper. The
					Union of Wynand Employees, which is made up of dedicated Toohey
					followers, goes on strike to demand the reinstatement of Toohey
					and the other editors. They also demand a complete reversal of the paper’s
					pro-Roark policy. Wynand runs the paper with a skeleton crew. The
					picket lines outside become violent, and a few of the remaining
					employees are injured when they enter the building in the morning.
					Wynand works fiercely and Dominique moves into the Banner building
					to help him in any way she can. Every day, however, they print fewer
					copies of the Banner, and even those copies go unsold.

Roark’s bombing of the Cortlandt building is the novel’s
					climax, as the opposing forces in the novel come into all-out conflict.
					The bombing marks the first gesture of defiance by the talented
					few against the mediocre majority. Although Roark is the one who
					actually bombs the building, all of the major figures are involved:
					Keating officially designs the building, Toohey corrupts it, and Dominique
					aids and watches Roark’s destruction of it. Roark never before reacts
					to Toohey’s provocations, but never before does Toohey physically
					alter Roark’s work. When Roark reacts, he does so in characteristic
					fashion, taking firm, irrevocable action that leaves no room for
					counter-arguments. A less ideal man might have filed a lawsuit or
					even, like Stephen Mallory, made a futile attempt to kill Toohey,
					but Roark takes final action to destroy the blasphemy against his
					design. 

Roark reacts differently to the Cortlandt building than
					to the Stoddard Temple because the temple is completed according
					to his specifications and altered later. He does not care what the
					world does with his finished buildings but insists on finishing
					his buildings as he wishes. The Cortlandt complex perverts Roark’s
					ideas before they have been implemented. Unable to tolerate this
					kind of compromise, Roark must destroy the mediocrity to maintain
					his integrity.

	The bombing seals Dominique and Roark’s love. Dominique
					has been unable to abandon the world completely and has been torn between
					society and Roark. Now she signals her renewed allegiance to Roark
					by helping him bomb the building. Dominique has always been
					stimulated by violence, and the bombing sets her free and makes her
					ready to resume her relationship with Roark. Her lifelessness following
					the explosion is part of her rebirth; with the annihilation of the Cortlandt
					comes the annihilation of her resistance to the world. We later
					learn that when Dominique cuts herself in the car, it is her final
					act of masochism. The violent destruction of the Cortlandt building
					heals Dominique and reconciles her with the man she loves.

	In the chapters before and after the novel’s climax,
					Rand sums up the ideology of the novel by giving both Roark and
					Toohey two lengthy philosophical monologues. These two monologues
					serve the same role as closing arguments in a courtroom, a last
					chance for each side to make its point. Rand employs setting and
					tone to indicate that we should prefer Roark’s monologue. Roark,
					the novel’s idol and savior, discusses his beliefs on the importance
					of the ego in the serene setting of a luxury yacht trip. He speaks
					to Wynand, his close friend, and his speech is calm, amicable, and
					reassuring. Toohey goes on his tirade in Keating’s claustrophobic,
					shabby apartment. He expresses his philosophy of selflessness as
					he terrorizes the pathetic, beaten-down Keating. By giving Roark’s
					monologue such a serene tone and Toohey’s such a fearful one, Rand
					does not so much ask us to choose a side as remind us that Roark’s
					has always been the correct one.

