With the help of Humbert’s acquaintance Gaston Godin,
					Humbert and Lolita move to 14 Thayer Street, an unimpressive house
					in Beardsley. Humbert is disappointed in the Beardsley School for Girls,
					which emphasizes social skills rather than intellectual achievement.
					The headmistress, Pratt, believes that Beardsley girls must focus
					on the “four D’s”: Dramatics, Dance, Debating, and Dating. Humbert
					is appalled, but some teachers reassure him that the girls do some
					good, solid schoolwork. The Thayer Street house has a view of the
					school playground, which pleases Humbert, since he believes he will
					be able to watch Lolita and, he hopes, other nymphets. Unfortunately,
					builders arrive to make changes and block his view. 

Humbert describes Beardsley and his neighbors, with whom
					he is on civil yet distant terms. He constantly worries that they
					might snoop on his arrangement. Humbert also worries that Lolita
					might confide in their cook, Mrs. Holigan, and tries to make sure
					that they are never left alone together.

Humbert’s friendship with Gaston Godin, a popular man
					regarded as a French sophisticate and genius scholar, smoothes his
					arrival in the new town of Beardsley. Gaston knows all of the small
					boys in the neighborhood and has portraits of them, as well as famous
					artists, in his home. Humbert enjoys their occasional chess games
					but finds Gaston to be a mediocre scholar and somewhat dim-witted. 

Humbert and Lolita’s relationship has become more strained. Despite
					her allowance and many small presents, Lolita wants more money,
					and she starts to demand it before performing sexual favors. Humbert
					periodically breaks into her room to steal back her savings so she
					cannot run away from him. 

Humbert worries about Lolita attracting boys, and he reads
					the local paper’s teen advice column for instruction. He allows
					Lolita to interact with some boys in groups, but never alone, a
					rule that upsets Lolita. Despite his attempt to control every aspect
					of Lolita’s life, Humbert can’t be sure that she hasn’t stolen away
					with a boy. However, he has no particular boy to suspect. Humbert
					imagines how others see him and wonders how he has managed to fool
					everyone. He still lives in a constant state of anxiety. 

Humbert finds himself disappointed by Lolita’s friends,
					few of whom are nymphets. He talks to Lolita’s friend Mona to discover
					if Lolita has any boyfriends, but Mona, rather than supplying Humbert
					with details, seems attracted to him instead. 

In a brief aside, Humbert describes how, sometimes, he
					would crawl over to Lolita’s desk while she was doing her homework
					and beg for some affection. Each time, Lolita rebuffs him.

One day, Pratt informs Humbert that Lolita isn’t maturing
					sexually and exhibits disciplinary problems. Pratt’s psychological
					analysis bothers Humbert, as do the evaluations given by Lolita’s
					teachers. Pratt ends by asking Humbert if Lolita knows about sex,
					and she tells him that Lolita should start dating boys and, furthermore,
					that she should be allowed to take part in the school play. Pratt
					goes on to say that Lolita has an alarming vocabulary of curse words.
					After his appointment with Pratt, Humbert goes to see Lolita in
					the study room, where Lolita and another girl are reading quietly.
					Sitting beside Lolita, and behind the other girl, Humbert pays Lolita
					sixty-five cents to masturbate him.

Like Ramsdale, Beardsley is a quiet, placid little town
					where neighbors are on good terms and families meet happily in the
					streets. Even the Beardsley School for Girls is essentially an artistic
					finishing school, designed to teach girls to be pleasant and polite
					company. In many ways, Beardsley represents the very model of a
					clean, family-oriented 1950s town, but, like Ramsdale, secrets lurk
					just beneath the surface. Nabokov indicates, for example, that the
					beloved Gaston is a pedophile with a penchant for small boys, luring
					them to his home with the promise of chores and small chocolates.
					The portraits of young boys which hang in Gaston’s home are matched
					and echoed by the portraits of artists, all of whom are homosexual, which
					also hang on Gaston’s walls. 

Humbert doesn’t think much of Gaston, yet the bare facts
					of their situations are remarkably similar, as both men are pedophiles
					who manage to fool conventional society—particularly that element
					of society with aesthetic and cultural pretensions. Similarly, Lolita’s friends,
					though they are young teenagers in a small town, seem sexually knowledgeable
					and experienced. Mona, for example, has already had a relationship
					with a marine. And the Beardsley School, for all its old-fashioned
					ideals, is nonetheless very concerned with the sexual and romantic
					lives of its students. On the surface, Beardsley is a proper small
					town, but, like Humbert, the genteel image hides darker lusts and
					motives.

Humbert’s suddenly blocked view of the playground foreshadows
					Humbert’s weakening grip on Lolita and her newly developed aptitude
					for deception. Once established in the small town, Humbert expects
					that he and Lolita will live as a normal family during the day while
					continuing to be lovers at night. However, Lolita’s unhappiness,
					as well as her normal adolescent tendencies, causes her both to
					rebel against Humbert and to attempt to manipulate him. Humbert
					bemoans her lack of morals as she starts demanding higher fees for
					sexual favors, and he becomes increasingly paranoid as Lolita establishes
					herself in her new community. The relationship parodies the standard
					father–teenage-daughter relationship, with Humbert establishing
					rules and Lolita finding ways to rebel. Ultimately, Humbert’s fears
					are realized when Lolita joins the school play. The combination
					of Quilty’s influence and her new dramatic training will teach Lolita
					enough to escape her stepfather completely.

Nabokov’s humorous, though disturbing, depiction of an encounter
					between Humbert and Pratt is indicative of the darkly ironic humor
					that pervades the novel. The more Pratt talks about Lolita’s sexuality,
					the more Humbert appears to be embarrassed. The more embarrassed
					Humbert appears, the more Pratt engages in simplistic psychological
					analysis of Lolita. Not only is her highly inaccurate diagnosis
					of Lolita’s sexual knowledge a slight to the practice of psychology,
					but it also reinforces Humbert’s belief that he has managed to fool
					everyone. Pratt’s injunction that Humbert take charge of his daughter’s
					sexual education gets fulfilled, but in a way that grossly parodies
					her initial intent. Instead of going to Lolita and paternally teaching
					her about proper, healthy relations with the opposite sex, Humbert
					visits Lolita’s classroom and pays her sixty-five cents to discreetly
					put her hands down his pants. The scene represents yet another moment
					where Humbert passes a moral threshold in his actions. Humbert is
					growing reckless, not only bringing their sexual relationship into
					a public place, but doing so in the presence of another young girl.
					The nameless other girl—who seems doll-like, with her porcelain
					skin and platinum hair—and the classroom setting add a new element
					of depravity to the act, as if Humbert is now guilty of violating
					more than just Lolita. 

