The fraught relationship that Meridian has with her mother casts a shadow
				over much of her life, and she struggles to overcome this and other obstacles as
				she searches for self-awareness and self-acceptance. Her mother’s emotional
				distance, disapproving nature, and moral superiority fill Meridian with guilt
				and sadness, which persist well into adulthood. Meridian longs for guidance and
				a sense of belonging. Unsure of the existence of God and her own relationship to
				the spiritual world, Meridian finds that traditional paths and explanations do
				not comfort her. Instead, she turns to the civil rights movement, which gains
				force and momentum during her young adult years. Ultimately, she struggles with
				her own sense of sacrifice and dedication to the cause. She questions her own
				revolutionary impulses after admitting her inability to kill on behalf
				of the movement. Feeling a gulf in her life between the ideals of
				the other civil rights activists and the ways by which they actually go about
				implementing change, Meridian returns to her roots, working and living in
				often-impoverished and rural communities.

Meridian selflessly helps others in order to compensate for the guidance
				she never received from her mother. The work, coupled with her bravery and
				determination, result in the emergence of a calm, sustaining, and growing
				self-awareness. At the beginning of the novel, she is a broken and damaged
				individual, mourning a love and loss she cannot verbalize. At the end, she
				emerges whole and healthy, thanks to her struggles and the hard-won wisdom she
				has acquired along the way. Meridian ultimately realizes that no one person,
				movement, or institution can offer her the assistance she seeks, and she finally
				turns to herself. Meridian’s journey to self-discovery is marked by physical and
				sexual abuse, a broken marriage, and a child she decides to give away. Her
				strange illness is in some ways a manifestation of her instability and
				insecurity. Her bouts of lost consciousness and episodes of paralysis signal
				that she is a woman without an identity or a sustaining inner life. Ultimately,
				she realizes that her power lies in her unique and unwavering
				courage.

