Peter Walsh’s most consistent character trait is ambivalence:
				he is middle-aged and fears he has wasted his life, but sometimes
				he also feels he is not yet old. He cannot commit to an identity,
				or even to a romantic partner. He cannot decide what he feels and
				tries often to talk himself into feeling or not feeling certain
				things. For example, he spends the day telling himself that he no
				longer loves Clarissa, but his grief at losing her rises painfully
				to the surface when he is in her presence, and his obsession with
				her suggests that he is still attracted to her and may even long
				for renewed romance. Even when he gathers his anger toward Clarissa
				and tells her about his new love, he cannot sustain the anger and
				ends up weeping. Peter acts as a foil to Richard, who is stable,
				generous, and rather simple. Unlike calm Richard, Peter is like
				a storm, thundering and crashing, unpredictable even to himself. 

Peter’s unhealed hurt and persistent insecurity make him
				severely critical of other characters, especially the Dalloways.
				He detests Clarissa’s bourgeois lifestyle, though he blames Richard
				for making her into the kind of woman she is. Clarissa intuits even
				his most veiled criticisms, such as when he remarks on her green
				dress, and his judgments strongly affect her own assessments of
				her life and choices. Despite his sharp critiques of others, Peter
				cannot clearly see his own shortcomings. His self-obsession and
				neediness would have suffocated Clarissa, which is partly why she
				refused his marriage proposal as a young woman. Peter acquiesces
				to the very English society he criticizes, enjoying the false sense
				of order it offers, which he lacks in his life. Despite Peter’s
				ambivalence and tendency toward analysis, he still feels life deeply.
				While Clarissa comes to terms with her own mortality, Peter becomes
				frantic at the thought of death. He follows a young woman through
				the London streets to smother his thoughts of death with a fantasy
				of life and adventure. His critical nature may distance him from
				others, but he values his life nonetheless. 

