Centuries ago, the man who was—no matter
						what his errors—the greatest of your philosophers, has stated the formula
						defining the concept of existence and the rule of all knowledge:
						A is A. A thing is itself. You have never grasped the meaning of
						his statement. I am here to complete it: Existence is Identity,
						Consciousness is Identification.

Rearden vanishes, sending Dagny a note that says only,
					“I have met him. I don’t blame you.” Without him, the output of
					the steel industry shrinks. The country is panicky, and violent
					gangs gain control. Newspapers tell conflicting stories, mostly
					in the form of denials, but everywhere the collapse of society is
					obvious. 

In an attempt to calm the public, the government announces
					that Mr. Thompson, the Head of State, will give a speech on all
					stations to address the crisis. The date and time are announced
					repeatedly for a week. At the moment the speech is to begin, the
					airwaves are taken over, and John Galt addresses the public instead.
					Galt delivers a long, detailed speech about the state of the nation
					and the strike of the mind and its reasons. 

He denounces the mystics who claim God as the highest
					moral authority, and the socialists, who claim one’s neighbors as
					the highest moral authority. He argues that morality is not an arbitrary
					system imposed from the outside, but an integral part of man himself. Man’s
					reason, Galt says, is his moral faculty. Serving himself is the highest
					goal of the moral man. He describes the principles under which every
					man must live: reason, purpose, and self-esteem. These principles,
					he declares, imply and require all of man’s virtues: rationality,
					independence, integrity, honesty, justice, productiveness, and pride.
					He calls for a general strike, asking those with any shred of reason
					left to withdraw their sanction and stop supporting their own destroyers.
					He urges people to accept reality and to stop shrinking from knowledge,
					but accept it and reclaim the concept of an objective reality. 

After the speech, Mr. Thompson and the other Washington
					men are terrified and desperate. Dr. Stadler suggests coldly that
					they should kill Galt. Mr. Thompson thinks that Galt is a man of
					action, precisely what the nation needs, and that he can get the
					retired industrialists back. Thompson wants to negotiate with him.

After the broadcast, Eddie tells Dagny that he knows John
					Galt, that for years he has talked to him at the Taggart cafeteria.
					He wonders if he was helping to save or to destroy the railroad.
					Dagny asks him to keep his knowledge of Galt’s employment secret,
					because the government is desperate to find him. 

The country falls deeper into chaos. The government
					searches for Galt, while a steady flow of broadcasts announce that
					John Galt will solve the country’s problems. Thompson asks Dagny
					if she knows where to find Galt. He hints that the situation is
					now desperate. He can no longer control the government’s dangerous
					faction, and if they were to find Galt first, they might kill him.
					She tells Thompson that she does not know where Galt is. After her
					conversation with Mr. Thompson, Dagny is so afraid for Galt that
					she rushes to his apartment. When she reaches him, he tells her
					that she was followed by government agents, and in a short time
					they will storm the apartment. He tells her that she must pretend
					to be against him. If they realize the nature of Galt and Dagny’s
					relationship, they will use her to torture him. When the agents appear
					to arrest him, she pretends he is her enemy. 

The looters hold Galt prisoner while they try to convince
					him to become the country’s economic dictator, but he refuses. Since
					he is literally at gunpoint, he agrees to perform any task they
					tell him to do, but he refuses to think for them. His mind cannot
					be compelled. Several men attempt to convince him, appealing to
					his sense of pity, greed, or fear, but Galt is unbreakable. He asks
					to see Dr. Stadler, who is deeply shaken by the encounter. Meanwhile,
					the newspapers declare that Galt has decided to help the government
					and that he is currently conferring with the nation’s leaders. No
					one on the street believes the articles, and most do not believe
					that Galt has been found at all. To reassure the people, the looters
					announce the unveiling of the John Galt Plan for the economy, but
					at a television appearance to announce it, Galt reveals to the cameras
					a hidden gun pointing at him. He says to the cameras, “Get the hell
					out of my way!”

Civil war breaks out in California, and the Comet is stranded. Eddie
					leaves to try to restore Taggart’s transcontinental service. Dagny
					receives a letter from Francisco telling her to contact him if Galt
					is in danger.

The John Galt speech, like Roark’s speech in Rand’s other
					major novel, The Fountainhead, forms the philosophical
					heart of the novel and the basis for much of Rand’s philosophy.
					The central tenet is that reason, not faith or emotion, forms the
					basis of human prosperity. Men must choose the rational over the
					irrational and accept objective reality, since, as Galt says, existence
					exists (“A is A”). Furthermore, men must live for their own self-interest,
					pursuing their own values, and not for others. To do so, they must
					be free of any interference from the government or other institutions
					that might seek to enslave the mind. The mind, as the motive power
					of the world, must be free. Most of the ideas presented in the speech
					have appeared before, in pieces of conversations, but here they
					are integrated into a single, comprehensive statement. Galt’s speech
					is an ultimatum for the men in power and a call to arms for their
					victims.

In believing Galt will negotiate with the government,
					the looters seriously miscalculate. Thompson assumes Galt can be
					tempted by power for its own sake. He imagines Galt will compromise
					his ideals in exchange for a role in the government. Dr. Ferris
					and Cuffy Meigs, meanwhile, understand that Galt is their enemy
					and that his position is not negotiable. If he is put in charge,
					the looters will no longer be able to exist. They see killing him
					as their only means of self-preservation, though they may be wrong
					to assume they will survive at all in the spiraling chaos that engulfs
					the country. Dr. Stadler agrees that Galt threatens his existence,
					and his meeting with Galt destroys what little remains of his self-worth.
					He has worked hard to avoid objective reality, and Galt makes the
					avoidance impossible. Stadler must confront what he has become and
					the world he is in, and this is more than he can bear. Where men
					like Stadler and Jim remain dark and unknown to themselves, Galt
					possesses the light of self-knowledge, which cannot help but illuminate everything.
					In the world of Rand’s philosophy, nothing is more deadly to a creature
					of illusion and obscurity than light and clarity.

The clash between Galt and the looters is the battle of
					mind versus muscle. The looters have only brute force as a tool,
					while Galt has his mind. Although the looters can use force to command
					him physically, they are powerless to coerce his mind. The notion
					that they can compel him to think for them, in fact to want to think
					for them, is preposterous. Yet they cannot imagine a man so completely immune
					to compulsion and corruption that he would refuse to accept the
					power they offer him, even at gunpoint.

