A teenager on trial for homicide. Steve Harmon is a sixteen-year-old African American. He is a good student who wants to be a filmmaker. Steve is now in prison and on trial for having taken part in a robbery that ended in murder. Steve is afraid all the time. He composes a movie about the experience of being on trial.

Read an in-depth analysis of Steve Harmon.

The prosecutor trying to get Steve Harmon convicted. Steve Harmon’s screenplay describes her as “the Dedicated Prosecutor.” Petrocelli has dark hair and eyes and dresses in business suits. She is smart and intense. Petrocelli uses words skillfully, deliberately inserting labels such as “monster” for emotional effect.

Read an in-depth analysis of Sandra Petrocelli.

Steve Harmon’s defense attorney. Steve Harmon’s screenplay describes her as “the Defense Attorney with Doubts.” O’Brien is petite, red-haired, and freckled. She has a businesslike, objective manner. O’Brien advises Steve on how he should look and behave during the trial, urging him to take his situation seriously. She continually reminds Steve of the need to convince the jury that he is innocent

Read an in-depth analysis of Kathy O’Brien.

The defense attorney for James King, Steve Harmon’s fellow defendant. Briggs has white hair and blue eyes and dresses conservatively. Briggs has a hard-hitting approach to addressing the jury and questioning witnesses. He succeeds in discrediting several of the State’s witnesses. However, Briggs does not succeed in establishing King’s innocence.

The justice who presides over Steve Harmon’s trial. The judge is tall and thin and about sixty years old. He sometimes looks bored. On and off the bench, the judge exchanges small talk with the prosecution and defense attorneys. He makes quick decisions about court procedures in order not to waste time. The judge also ends court early when he can. For the judge, Steve Harmon’s case is just a boring job.

Steve Harmon’s co-defendant and one of the two main perpetrators of the crime. The opening titles of Steve’s screenplay call King “the Thug.” King is twenty-three years old. Before the trial, James King befriended Steve and made Steve feel cool. During the trial, King tries to intimidate Steve with sneers, hard looks, and tough talk. King also tries to project a tough image in court. He does not testify at the trial.

A State witness and one of the two main perpetrators of the crime. Steve’s screenplay titles label him “the Rat.” Evans is a twenty-two-year-old big, heavy, ugly man. He is currently doing time for breaking and entering. As a career criminal, Bobo lives up to his name (Spanish for “clown”). Bobo sells cigarettes from the robbery, creating a chain of evidence that leads to James King and Steve Harmon.

A State witness, who also took part in the crime. Steve’s screenplay describes him as a member of the Diablos and “the Tough Guy Wannabe.” Osvaldo is fourteen years old. He is slim, well built, and covered with tattoos. Cruz lives in Steve’s neighborhood and taunts and threatens Steve. Osvaldo Cruz testifies that his part in the crime was to impede anyone from chasing the perpetrators. Steve’s part was to be the lookout.

State witness and eyewitness to the crime. Mrs. Henry, who is Black, is a retired librarian. She was in the store during the robbery and testifies at the trial, though she also states that she found it difficult to bear witness against any Black person.

Steve Harmon’s mentor and a character witness. Mr. Sawicki is the mentor of Steve Harmon’s film club at school. Steve remembers Mr. Sawicki’s advice about screenwriting as he composes the screenplay of the trial. At the trial itself, Mr. Sawicki serves as a character witness for Steve. Sawicki portrays Steve Harmon as an honest filmmaker who is also an honest person.

Steve Harmon’s father. Mr. Harmon is a graduate of Morehouse College, from which he dreams his son will also graduate. Mr. Harmon visits Steve in prison and offers words of encouragement. However, he has doubts about his son’s innocence, and his doubts communicate themselves to Steve. Mr. Harmon no longer understands his son. The distance between Mr. Harmon and Steve persists after the trial ends.

Steve Harmon’s mother. Mrs. Harmon cries about Steve and his situation but clings to her belief in Steve’s innocence and takes refuge in her Christian faith. When she finally gets the courage to visit Steve in jail, she brings him a Bible and asks him to read to her. Mrs. Harmon faithfully attends every day of Steve’s trial and is present when the jury delivers its verdict.

The drugstore owner who was shot during the robbery at issue. Nesbitt was a fifty-five-year-old immigrant from St. Kitts and well respected in the neighborhood. Nesbitt was the legal owner of the gun that killed him. The gun goes off during Nesbitt’s struggle with one of the robbers. He appears at the trial in the form of crime scene photos.

