The novel’s protagonist, Isabel is courageous and intelligent with a strong memory and imagination. At thirteen years of age, she faces terrible trials, yet her resilience and persistence see her through. After her branding, she spends weeks in a deep sadness, but she emerges even stronger than before. She has only known the life of a slave, and one of her earliest memories is being sold with her family and separated from her father, whom she describes as a roaring lion. Her mother died of smallpox, the disease that scarred Isabel and her younger sister, Ruth. Isabel is now Ruth’s only protector, a role she takes very seriously.

Isabel’s inner strength is evident from the first scene when she confronts Pastor Weeks about Mary Finch’s will, a document she has read. She feels the injustice of being sold by Robert Finch and expresses it aloud, only to be silenced by the pastor. In fact, Isabel often has trouble holding her tongue, especially when she is wronged or when Ruth is in danger. This powerful internal nature is like a seed planted early in the novel. Isabel’s nature grows from chapter to chapter until it blossoms into the action of saving Curzon and rowing to freedom.

Isabel’s internal growth is reflected in Isabel’s various names. She begins as Isabel Finch, owned by Mary. Curzon affectionately calls her “Country.” In Chapter IX, Madam announces that Isabel’s name is Sal Lockton, a name that obliterates Isabel’s earlier self. Isabel never accepts this name, just as she never fully accepts her role as Madam’s slave. Captain Morse calls her “Just Sal.” Most significantly, as she escapes from the Locktons’ house, she writes a pass naming herself “Isabel Gardener,” in reference to the gardens in the Rhode Island farm. Naming herself becomes a metaphor for finding and acknowledging her power.

Isabel begins the novel self-centered and Ruth-centered. She must protect them both and work hard, and she cares nothing about politics or the war. After she meets Curzon, this attitude begins to shift. Isabel now cares about him, too. She also develops connections with Becky and some of the soldier wives. On Christmas Day, she remembers what her mother taught her, to “keep Christmas,” and performs a most unselfish act of giving to a family in more need than her. Isabel might have simply saved herself at the end of the book, but she chooses to save Curzon, too, risking her own life. Through all her trials and because of them, Isabel emerges generous and selfless.

