The old healer Ultima lives and teaches the moral system
				that the novel espouses. Antonio’s relationship with Ultima is the
				most important bond in the novel. Ultima acts as Antonio’s mentor
				and helps him cope with his anxieties and uncertainties. Ultima
				claims a spiritual connection to Antonio that manifests its power
				in Chapter 1, when Antonio dreams of Ultima
				burying his afterbirth to keep his destiny secret from the arguing
				families of his parents. By presenting herself as the keeper of
				his destiny, Ultima immediately establishes a central role in Antonio’s
				psyche. Ultima uses her unique position of influence with
				benevolence, preferring to teach Antonio to think for himself rather
				than indoctrinating him with her own sense of morality.

	Like Antonio, Ultima is grounded in both the indigenous
				and Catholic traditions. She understands that life and spirituality
				can be viewed in many different and equally valid ways. Although
				the Catholic church does not recognize her mystical powers, Ultima respects
				the wisdom of the Catholic faith and attends mass regularly. Her
				appreciation for multiple faiths and perspectives bolsters her conviction
				that each person must make independent moral decisions, rather than
				blindly trust any single authority. Ultima tries to instill in Antonio
				the same tolerance, independence, and open-mindedness that define
				her faith and outlook. This view compels Ultima to treat Antonio
				with understanding and respect, even when he is a small and obedient
				child. Rather than force Antonio to help her with Lucas’s exorcism,
				for instance, Ultima clearly explains what is at stake and allows
				Antonio to make his own decision. At the end of the novel, on her
				deathbed, Ultima treats Antonio as her spiritual heir, asking him
				to bury the owl that has symbolized her life force throughout the
				book. Though Ultima dies, her spirit and her influence will guide
				Antonio throughout his life.

