The narrator wishes the reader farewell. He compares the reading process to
					a journey in which he and the reader are fellow passengers in a coach. He hopes
					that he has been an entertaining companion.

Partridge visits Jones at the prison to break the horrifying news that
					Mrs. Waters is Tom's mother. Tom receives a letter from Mrs. Waters in which she
					alludes to this fact and says she has been greatly affected by it. She adds as a
					postscript that Fitzpatrick is on the recovery. Black George arrives
					next at the prison, and he and Tom exchange warm greetings. Black George reports
					that Squire Western and Mrs. Western have had a vicious argument that
					has concluded with Mrs. Western declaring she never wants to see her brother
					again. The Squire has been reconciled with Sophia, however. The narrator
					retraces his footsteps to describe how this reunion came about. Sophia took her
					father's side when arguing with her aunt about Lord Fellamar—this
					delighted Squire Western and endeared Sophia to him once more.

Allworthy visits Nightingale's father and, after three hours, convinces
					the old man to see his son. On his entrance to the house, Allworthy spots Black
					George, but takes no notice of him. Later, he asks Nightingale's father what
					business he had with Black George. Nightingale's father shows him five bank
					bills of one hundred pounds each that Black George has given him to invest.
					Allworthy recognizes the bills as those he gave to Tom.

Mrs. Miller is depressed about Tom's situation, but Allworthy cheers her
					somewhat by telling her he has no doubt there will soon be a reconciliation
					between Nightingale and his father. Allworthy summons Dowling from
					Blifil's room to ask him what should be done about the case of the bank
					bills. Mrs. Miller interrupts their conversation and introduces Allworthy to
					Nightingale, who brings the tidings that Fitzpatrick has recovered and
					admitted provoking the duel. Mrs. Miller urges Nightingale to remind Allworthy
					in what great esteem Tom holds him. Tears come to Allworthy's eyes and he
					reminisces briefly about the time he discovered the infant Tom between his
					sheets. The narrator hints that Allworthy's tears have been partly caused by a
					letter that he received from Square.

The narrator presents Square's letter to Allworthy. Square writes that he is
					terminally ill, and that he has been reflecting on his past behavior. He feels
					worst about his behavior to Tom, who is innocent of the crime for which
					Allworthy condemned him. In fact, during Allworthy's illness, Tom was the only
					person who showed any real concern and compassion. Tom's mirth was motivated by
					Allworthy's recovery. Square hints at the dark designs of "another Person." The
					narrator also presents a letter from Mr. Thwackum to Allworthy, in which
					Thwackum haughtily and arrogantly tells Allworthy to consider him for the
					position of Vicar of Aldergrove if the current vicar should die.

Mrs. Miller tells Allworthy that Nightingale discovered that the men who accused
					Tom were commissioned to do so by a Lord who wanted Tom sent off on a ship.
					Nightingale also happened to see Mr. Dowling with these men in the tavern.
					Shocked, Allworthy calls for Dowling, but he has already left. Allworthy asks
					Blifil if he knows whether Dowling has seen the eyewitnesses of Tom's duel.
					Blifil does not speak for some moments, which leads Mrs. Miller to shout
					"Guilty!" Allworthy asks Blifil why it is taking him so long to answer. Blifil
					answers that he sent Dowling to mollify the evidence of the witnesses. Allworthy
					now feels even more tenderness for Blifil. He proposes that they all pay a visit
					to Tom in prison. Partridge arrives and privately tells Mrs. Miller that
					Mrs. Waters is Tom's mother. Allworthy, hearing that the man with Mrs. Miller is
					Tom's servant, summons him. He immediately recognizes him to be Partridge.
					Surprised, he asks if he is indeed Tom's servant. Allworthy asks Partridge many
					questions about Jones.

Allworthy asks Partridge why he has been serving his own son. Partridge tells
					Allworthy that he is not actually Tom's father. He tells Allworthy what has
					happened in his life since he was found guilty. First Partridge worked for a
					lawyer in Salisbury. Then he moved to Lymington, where he worked for a lawyer
					for three years, after which he set up a school. One day, one of his pigs broke
					into his neighbor's yard and Partridge was taken to court. Allworthy tells him
					to get to the point. After seven years in the Winchester jail, Partridge taught
					at Cork in Ireland. He then moved to Bristol, where he met Tom. Partridge now
					tells Allworthy that Mrs. Waters, with whom Tom has had a relationship, is Tom's
					own mother. As Allworthy expresses his horror at the situation, Mrs. Waters
					walks in and asks to talk to Allworthy alone.

Mrs. Waters tells Allworthy the story of Tom's conception and birth: his father,
					Mr. Summer, was the son of a clergyman whom Allworthy raised and even sent to
					the university. Mrs. Waters is not Tom's mother, although she did put the baby
					Tom in Allworthy's bed. She reveals that Bridget Allworthy, Allworthy's own
					sister, was Tom's mother. After Allworthy left for London, Bridget approached
					Jenny's mother and confided her secret in her. Together they contrived to send
					Deborah Wilkins, the maid, to Dorsetshire to have her out of the way. Allworthy
					is shocked that his sister did not tell him the truth. Jenny exculpates her,
					however, by saying that she intended to tell Allworthy one day. Bringing the
					conversation back to the present, Mrs. Waters tells Allworthy that Dowling
					approached her and promised her money from a "very worthy Gentleman" if she
					continued her prosecution of Tom. Allworthy guesses that this gentleman must be
					Blifil.

Squire Western arrives. He has discovered Sophia's letters from Tom.
					Allworthy offers to speak to Sophia after he has spoken to Dowling. Once Western
					has left, Jenny tells Allworthy that she spent twelve years with a man who swore
					to marry her but never actually did. She fled to Captain Waters for protection,
					and lived with him for many years under the alibi of being his wife. She met Tom
					when Captain Waters left to oppose the Jacobite rebels.

Mrs. Waters falls to her knees and praises Tom's goodness in saving her. Dowling
					interrupts them. Motioning to Jenny, Allworthy asks Dowling if he knows "this
					Lady." Dowling has to admit that he does. Allworthy now carries out a kind of
					trial by which he finds out that Blifil was indeed responsible for trying to
					bring further prosecution against Tom. Allworthy asks how Dowling could have
					been Blifil's accomplice. Dowling confesses that he already knows that Tom is
					Allworthy's nephew—on her deathbed, Bridget Allworthy took Dowling's
					hand and bid him tell Allworthy that Tom was her son. She also wrote a letter to
					Blifil explaining the story. Dowling entrusted the letter and story to Blifil,
					who promised to pass on the information to Allworthy.

Mrs. Miller returns and Allworthy tells her the shocking news. Mrs. Miller is
					overjoyed that Tom has been proven innocent. Before she leaves, Mrs. Waters
					tells the company that Tom will soon be released from prison. Allworthy summons
					Blifil and tells him to produce the letter that Bridget wanted him to deliver to
					Allworthy. Blifil's situation is "to be envied only be a Man who is just going
					to be hanged."

Allworthy reads Tom's letter to Sophia. The beauty of it brings tears to his
					eyes. Allworthy visits Sophia and congratulates her on her refusal to marry
					Blifil, which shows foresight on her part. Allworthy says that he has a
					different proposal for her—he has another nephew, whom he would like her
					to marry. Sophia expresses surprise at never having met this mysterious nephew,
					and Allworthy tells her that it is Tom. Sophia says she can appreciate that Tom
					must be a worthy nephew, but she cannot accept him as a husband. Squire Western
					suddenly bursts in and chastises Sophia. In his country dialect, Western bellows
					that he has a letter from Lady Bellaston relating that Tom is out of prison
					and on the loose. Western warns Sophia to stay away from the man. Allworthy
					takes this opportunity to acquaint Western with recent events. Squire Western
					now begs Allworthy to bring Tom to court Sophia that afternoon.

Allworthy apologizes to Tom for his past behavior. Tom says that there is no
					need for retribution; the joy he is experiencing now atones for his suffering.
					Tom laments his follies and vices, but Allworthy brushes them away, praising Tom
					for not being a hypocrite. Allworthy tells Tom that he has visited Sophia, and
					urges Tom to submit to Sophia's will. Mrs. Miller meets with Tom and tells him
					that she has explained to Sophia that Tom's proposal letter to Lady Bellaston
					was not meant seriously. Sophia still complained that Tom was a "Libertine," but
					Mrs. Miller told her that Tom turned down Mrs. Hunt. Mr. Western arrives,
					extremely impatient for the afternoon courtship festivities.

Jones tells Allworthy and Mrs. Miller how he gained his liberty from the prison.
					Mrs. Waters assured Fitzpatrick that Tom did not have an affair with his wife
					and, consequently, Fitzpatrick admitted that he initiated the duel. Moreover,
					Fitzpatrick is so delighted with what Mrs. Waters has told him that he praises
					Tom to Lord Fellamar, who decides that he should assist this man whom he
					affronted by his advances to Sophia.

Allworthy wishes to punish Blifil, but Tom argues for forgiveness. Mrs. Miller
					and Allworthy want Blifil to leave the house as soon as possible. Tom asks that
					he may be the messenger of the news. He finds Blifil bawling on his bed,
					although Blifil is frightened rather than contrite. Tom tells Blifil the
					news—he comforts Blifil and offers to provide for him. Blifil thanks Tom
					profusely, then departs. Allworthy reveals Black George's corruption to Tom. Tom
					tells Allworthy of Black George's generosity to him while he was in prison, but
					Allworthy is determined to punish Black George for his dishonesty. Partridge and
					Tom are reunited.

Tom meets Sophia at Western's house. They are both finely dressed and look
					breathtaking. At first they remain silent. Sophia suggests that Tom judge his
					own behavior—she tells him that only time will prove whether he can cast
					aside his wild desires. She does not understand how he could have been unchaste
					in Upton. Tom argues that the delicacy of women prevents them from imagining how
					sordid men can be. He argues that amours of the body do not affect the amour of
					the heart. Sophia accepts his reply, but says that she will only marry him after
					twelve months. They kiss. Mr. Western bursts in and, after teasing the lovers
					with bawdy jokes, orders Sophia to marry Tom immediately. Sophia says that she
					cannot disobey her father. Western looks forward to having a grandson in nine
					months.

The wedding is filled with mirth, and those who were unhappy before are happy
					now. The narrator summarizes the future. Tom makes Allworthy agree to give
					Blifil an annuity of 200 pounds, even though Allworthy refuses to speak to
					Blifil. Blifil converts to Methodism in the hopes of marrying a rich Methodist
					widow who lives near to him. Mrs. Fitzpatrick separates from Fitzpatrick.
					Mrs. Waters marries Parson Supple, and Allworthy grants her an annuity of sixty
					pounds. Partridge sets up a school with the help of Tom. He is engaged to
					Molly Seagrim. Sophia and Tom now live on Western's estate and have two
					children, a boy and a girl. Western has retired to a smaller estate, but visits
					the couple frequently. Tom has conquered his cheeky streak. He and Sophia are
					still very much in love, and hold each other in the highest esteem. They show
					kindness and respect to all around them.

Book XVIII follows the archetypal comic finale in that it consists of the
					resolution of a series of misunderstandings: Square's letter dispels
					Blifil's false accusations, and Mrs. Waters's testimony reveals Tom's true
					parentage.

The summary of future events that concludes the novel is typical of Romantic
					comedy, and it serves to show which characters have experienced a "Revolution,"
					and which ones have not. Blifil, for example, shows no contrition about his
					wicked acts and instead begins plotting afresh. It is appropriate that Tom, the
					protagonist, has undergone the greatest transformation—he now lives in
					perfect chastity with Sophia as his wife. Tom's forgiveness of Blifil makes Tom
					a better man even than Allworthy, who wishes to punish Blifil. In such a
					way, rather than simply being born good, Tom achieves the status of "hero" by
					the novel's end. The vast arc that Tom makes from beggarly bastard to wealthy,
					dignified gentleman makes the novel a kind of Bildungsroman"—that
					is, a novel that charters the growth of a single character from infancy to
					maturity.
				

