That night at the inn, Simon and Daphne have sex, but before Simon he climaxes, he withdraws so that Daphne won’t get pregnant. When they arrive at Clyvedon, Daphne asks Simon what it was like to grow up there, but he refuses to discuss the topic and intends to keep his childhood memories a secret from Daphne. Daphne has tea with Mrs. Colson, the housekeeper, asking her about her time at Clyvedon. Prior to being the housekeeper, Mrs. Colson was a maid to the former duchess (Simon’s mother) and knew her well. Mrs. Colson recalls how difficult it was for the duchess to conceive a child and mentions that everyone assumed it was the duchess’s fault and not the duke’s. Mrs. Colson adds that a woman needs a “strong, healthy seed” from a man in order to have a child. This information is news to Daphne, but she manages to keep a neutral expression as Mrs. Colson talks about how the late duke cruelly rejected Simon because of his stutter. Seeing that Daphne is distracted by what she just learned, Mrs. Colson thanks Daphne for having tea with her and leaves.

That night as Simon and Daphne get ready for bed, Simon thinks that Daphne is looking at his mouth and becomes suspicious that Mrs. Colson may have mentioned his childhood stutter. Simon and Daphne have sex, and Daphne tells him that she loves him for the first time. Daphne notes that, as at the inn, Simon withdraws before climaxing, and she remembers Mrs. Colson’s remark about a strong, healthy seed. She asks Simon what is on the sheets, and he refuses to answer. Daphne suddenly understands that when Simon said he couldn’t have children, he meant that he refused to—it’s an issue of his personal wishes, rather than his physical capability. Daphne then accuses Simon of taking advantage of her ignorance on the subject and says that she can’t forgive him for lying to her. Simon explains that because of his father’s rejection, he has decided that the family title should die with him. Daphne suddenly remembers that she has letters from the old duke in her possession and wonders if he had wanted to apologize to Simon before he died. Simon storms out of the bedroom, and Daphne ponders what she will do next.

The return to Clyvedon highlights Simon’s struggle to escape the damage caused by his late father’s rejection. Simon had an unhappy childhood, as indicated by the discomfort he feels being back here. Even the servants’ kindness toward him and hatred of his father cause Simon embarrassment, and illustrate how deeply he’s haunted by his father’s lack of love. Though Daphne sees only their devotion to the man he’s become, Simon sees their pity for the little boy he used to be. Mrs. Colson’s conversation with Daphne about Simon’s childhood sheds further light on his struggles. Just as she says the late duke couldn’t forgive Simon for not being perfect, Simon can’t forgive his father for rejecting him. Simon’s refusal to have children as a means of revenge against his father demonstrates the deep anger he holds over his father’s mistreatment of him as a child, and the effect this has on his adult life. Simon chooses to refuse Daphne her dream of a family rather than giving up his vow to end the family bloodline. By crushing his late father’s hope, he crushes his new wife’s hope as well.

The motif of found family surfaces in these chapters. Though Simon never knew his mother and knew nothing but rejection from his father, he found a family in the servants who raised him. On their arrival, Daphne notes the devotion of the staff who knew Simon as a child, but Simon’s icy response suggests that Simon considers his found family inadequate; they cannot replace his father’s approval or make up for his mother’s death. As Mrs. Colson and Daphne get acquainted, Mrs. Colson’s memories of Nurse Hopkins and the seven years of work she did with Simon to improve his speech demonstrate the nurse’s motherly commitment to the little boy. Clearly, although Simon lacked his father’s love, his childhood did not completely lack warmth. Simon’s success is the result of not only the power of his stubbornness, but the support of his found family. Just as Daphne’s large, protective family has a positive impact on her, Simon’s devoted found family has been a source of support and growth.

