The protagonist and a seventeen-year-old high school student. Mav’s father, Adonis, gave him the name Maverick because it means “independent thinker.” Mav is a li’l homie in the King Lords gang and anxious to spread his wings and do more than what his junior status allows. He is the father of Seven and has a little girl on the way.

Read an in-depth analysis of Mav.

Mav’s mother. She is 38 years old, works two jobs, and helps with Mav’s baby. She has been a single mother since her husband went to prison and resents the choices he made that landed him there. She provides Mav with advice and guidance on his road to manhood and fatherhood. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Faye.

Mav’s father and one of the original King Lords. He went to prison when Mav was eight years old. While not directly telling Mav what to do in a gang-related situation, his relief at Mav’s choices, which lead him to avoid the gang, shows he wants a better life for his son.

Read an in-depth analysis of Adonis.

Mav’s girlfriend. She is on the basketball team at a Catholic school and hopes to get a college scholarship. She is not involved in gang activities and begs Mav to distance himself from them. Lisa is the mother of Mav’s daughter.

Read an in-depth analysis of Lisa.

Mav’s neighbor. Mr. Wyatt and his wife own the local store. He gives Mav a job and becomes a trusted father figure.

Read an in-depth analysis of Mr. Wyatt.

Mav’s cousin and friend. Dre was an active member of the King Lords until fatherhood compelled him to take a step back. He is 23 years old and often attempts to share his hard-earned wisdom with Mav, whom he loves like a brother. He is loving and loyal to his fiancée and their daughter. Dre’s death impacts Mav greatly.

Mav’s best friend and a member of the King Lords. His relationship with Iesha causes tension in his relationship with Mav, but King does care for Mav and is a constant presence in his life. He is pragmatic about what it takes to prosper in their world and has no time for anything that doesn’t benefit him. King and Mav constantly quarrel and then reconcile until later in the story. He thinks that Mav is passing up his only opportunity to make real money and that he is weak for wanting to live a straight life away from the gangs.

The crown, or head, of the King Lords. Shawn is Dre’s best friend and has known Mav since he was a young boy. He worries about Mav seeking vengeance for Dre’s murder because he cares for Mav and he knows by doing so goes against the gang’s hierarchy. As the crown, it is his responsibility to lead and to make sure that everyone knows their place.

A big homie with the King Lords. P-Nut is very flashy. King and Dre do not think that he is very smart, and when he becomes crown, he is quick to lord his new authority over the others.

King’s off-and-on girlfriend, and the mother of Mav’s son. She has a tough time being a mother, and she is quick to hand her responsibilities off to others.

Iesha’s mother. After Iesha leaves her baby with Mav, she never reaches out to inquire about her grandson.

Mav and Iesha’s infant son. Iesha named him King Jr., but Mav calls him Seven, which he believes is the number of perfection.

A li’l homie with the King Lords. He often hangs out with Mav and Junie.

A li’l homie with the King Lords. He is friends with Mav and Rico.

Lisa’s older brother. He behaves as if he is Lisa’s parent instead of her sibling. He does not think that Mav is good enough for Lisa and is furious when Mav gets her pregnant but does provide his support.

A member of the King Lords’ rival gang, the Garden Disciples. He is in Mav’s class at school. He has no qualms about saying inflammatory things, especially about Dre’s death. Ant is the victim of a revenge shooting.

Faye’s friend and romantic interest. She works as a nurse. She is a positive adult presence in Mav’s life but does not attempt to parent him. She is very supportive of Faye and understands that it is not easy for Faye to introduce her family to a romantic partner who is a woman.

A local addict. The police suspect him of killing Dre, but Mav knows that he is not capable of violence. Tony provides Mav with information about the real killer.

Dre’s fiancée. She cares for her daughter while attending college and plans to marry Dre after she graduates. She is on the phone with Dre when he is murdered.

Dre and Keisha’s three-year-old daughter.

Lisa’s best friend. Lisa lives with Tammy and her mother when there are troubles at home.

Tammy’s older sister.

Brenda’s boyfriend and a small-time criminal. He has a reputation in the neighborhood for selling counterfeit goods. Mav sees him wearing Dre’s gold watch.

