Frodo, Sam, and Gollum finally arrive at the gates of
					Mordor. They behold the Teeth of Mordor, the tall towers built earlier
					by the Men of Gondor after the fall of Sauron, but then later reoccupied
					by the Dark Lord upon his return to power.

At the sight of the closely guarded gate, Sam wonders
					how they will enter. Gollum replies that they must not enter, prompting
					Sam to ask why they bothered traveling to Mordor in the first place
					if they cannot go inside. Gollum replies that he fulfilled his part
					of the agreement, guiding the hobbits to the gate. Sam is angry,
					again asking why they bothered going to Mordor at all. Frodo affirms
					that he must enter Mordor at all costs. At the hobbits’ insistence,
					Gollum admits that there is another way into the kingdom, a secret
					way that he discovered earlier. Sam distrusts Gollum, but the hobbits
					have little choice but to follow the creature’s lead. Frodo reminds
					Gollum that he has sworn by his “Precious” to guide them safely
					and not betray them.

Gollum directs Sam and Frodo toward a road that bends
					south around Mordor, telling them that the road extends for a hundred leagues,
					but warning that they should not go that way. Frodo asks if there
					is a third way. Gollum admits that there is a third path running around
					to the back of the kingdom, past a fortress built long ago by tall
					Men with shining eyes. Frodo realizes that Gollum refers to the former
					fortress of Isildur, the warrior who defeated Sauron and won the
					Ring from him. Part of the fortress is a tall tower called the Tower
					of the Moon. Sam asks whether the tower is occupied, and Gollum
					replies that it is guarded by Orcs and by even worse creatures called
					Silent Watchers. Sam remarks that this third path sounds just as
					risky as the first one, but Gollum says the Dark Lord is focusing
					his attention elsewhere. Gollum admits that the rear path past the
					Tower of the Moon is dangerous, but that it is worth trying. The
					hobbits are suspicious, but they accept Gollum’s advice.

Four Nazgûl appear in the sky overhead, and the hobbits
					know that Sauron is observing them. Frodo and Sam grab their knives,
					but they know that escape is impossible. Gollum senses that other
					Men are heading toward Mordor too—Men with long dark hair, gold rings,
					and red flags. He describes them as very fierce, saying that he has
					never seen anything like them. There are always Men entering Mordor
					now. Sam asks whether the men have “oliphaunts” with them, as he
					has heard the creatures described in old poetry. Gollum has never
					seen an oliphaunt. He urges the hobbits to sleep through the daylight
					hours, and proceed again at night.

The Teeth of Mordor and the fortress of Isildur are further
					reminders of the idea that evil can overtake and corrupt goodness.
					According to the moral system Tolkien puts forth, good and evil
					are not necessarily inherent qualities. The good can become rotten,
					as we have seen with Saruman and Boromir. This possibility of transformation
					from good to evil is also true of the buildings of Mordor. The Teeth
					of Mordor and the fortress of Isildur are reminders of the fragility
					of goodness, as the gentle and peace-loving Men of Gondor originally
					built them. Frodo is startled to realize that the ghastly fortress
					of Isildur, which Gollum reports to be full of murderous Orcs and
					the even more horrible “Silent Watchers,” was originally the property
					of the Lord of Gondor. Ironically, the building of the one who fought
					against evil is now possessed by that very evil. Good is not guaranteed
					in Tolkien’s universe, but must forever be actively guarded and
					defended.

The impossibility of entering the final destination directly,
					and the necessity of following a roundabout route to get inside,
					is a common element of ancient epics from which Tolkien has borrowed. For
					instance, in the Divine Comedy, Dante is, like
					Frodo, a traveler who is motivated by good but who is forced to
					go into the mouth of hell in order to reach heaven later. Dante
					cannot simply take the shortest path toward his goal of reaching
					heaven, but must travel through realms of evil he would otherwise
					never visit. Similarly, Frodo and Sam must travel to the heart of
					evil in Mordor in order to ensure the ultimate triumph of good.
					The hobbits, as usual, attain their goals not by direct confrontation;
					they plan to take the back road to a hidden entrance to Mordor rather
					than fight the guards at Mordor’s gates. Though the safety of this
					alternate route is doubtful at best, Frodo and Sam have little choice
					but to follow Gollum’s advice.

The danger contained within the gates of Mordor continues
					to become ever more real, both to us and to Frodo and Sam. In this chapter,
					we glimpse for the first time the humans associated with the evil
					kingdom. Prior to this moment, Mordor was at first merely an idea
					of evil, and then a place largely associated with the fantastical, especially
					the dark shapes of the flying Nazgûl. Now Mordor
					is connected to the more real, yet equally terrifying, world of
					human evil. The Men of Mordor, with long dark hair, gold rings,
					and red flags, present yet another reminder that evil is not necessarily
					inherent, but can corrupt even the seemingly familiar realm of the
					human world to an almost unrecognizable degree.

