Speaking loudly so that her deaf Obasan (aunt in
					Japanese) can hear, Naomi asks if Uncle suffered. We now understand
					that Uncle is dead. While Obasan makes tea, Naomi looks around at
					the familiar clutter of the house. She sees that Obasan’s eyes and
					mouth are gummy, and notes that she has never seen Obasan cry.

A loaf of Uncle’s homemade bread sitting on the counter
					reminds Naomi of his first attempt at baking. Naomi was ten, and
					wanted to try a recipe for bread. Uncle wound up doing the baking
					himself, and produced a rock-hard loaf. Naomi’s older brother, Stephen, tried
					to serve it to her with margarine, but she refused to eat. Over the
					years, Uncle refined the recipe, but the results were always terrible.

Obasan describes the morning’s events. Uncle was taken
					to the hospital, where he died. Naomi wonders to herself what Uncle’s
					last hours were like. She wonders whether he returned to the sea,
					or to his mother. She thinks about what Obasan will do. She realizes
					that Stephen won’t help her. He is a moody, restless man.

Obasan says that she is too old, and then goes to scrape
					the mud from Naomi’s boots. As Naomi wonders if Obasan could live
					with her, Obasan says that both her body and the house are old.
					Naomi reflects that the house and all its clutter are inextricably
					linked to Obasan. Watching her aunt crouch over the boots, Naomi
					thinks that Obasan is the same as old women in France, or Mexico,
					or anywhere else on earth.

Naomi thinks about Grandma Nakane, Uncle’s mother. She
					was imprisoned in Vancouver Hastings Park, an internment camp, during
					World War II. Naomi remembers a family photograph depicting her
					closest relatives. Dr. and Mrs. Kato were her maternal grandparents,
					and Mr. and Mrs. Nakane her paternal grandparents. Grandpa Nakane,
					a boat builder, moved to Canada first, in 1893. He
					married his cousin’s widow, who had a son by her first husband. This
					son, Isamu, is the man Naomi calls Uncle. He married Ayako, the
					woman Naomi calls Obasan. Obasan has told Naomi that she married
					Uncle for the sake of Grandma Nakane, who shared Obasan’s love of
					music. Obasan bore two stillborn children. After the second birth,
					Aunt Emily gave Uncle and Obasan a puppy.

In the photo, Naomi’s father holds baby Stephen. Naomi’s mother
					is next to her sister, Emily. Naomi sees no resemblance between
					Aunt Emily, who is chubby, and Mother, who is delicate. Even as
					a girl, Naomi sensed tension and unhappiness in the family. Naomi’s
					mother and father, who were the first in their community not to
					have an arranged marriage, worked hard to draw their two families
					together. Naomi makes a vague reference to a worrisome letter from
					Japan that arrived after her own birth. She says that if her family
					was once close, it isn’t anymore.

Naomi tells us that, despite her stellar academic performance, Aunt
					Emily couldn’t get hired as a teacher. Naomi also tells us that her
					father helped Uncle build boats. He designed a beautiful one, a work
					of art praised by an RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) officer.
					In 1941, Uncle was taken away while in his
					boat. He never returned to the sea. At this point in the narrative,
					we don’t discover what work Aunt Emily eventually took up, or what
					became of Uncle.

Because of its lyricism and nonlinear construction, Obasan sometimes
					reads like a transcript of Naomi’s thoughts. It wanders back and
					forth in time, it leaps from subject to subject, and it jumbles
					up the chronology of its stories. Like a train of thought, it takes
					its direction from images and associations, rather than from the orderly
					progress of time. For example, the family photo makes Naomi think
					of her father’s career, which makes her think of the boat he and
					Uncle built, which makes her think of the praise of the RCMP officer,
					which makes her think of Uncle’s imprisonment. This construction
					can make the narrative feel disjointed and jumpy, but it also makes
					us feel that we’re getting intimate access to Naomi’s inner thoughts.

Naomi infuses her story with small mysteries. We learn
					in Chapter 2 that she has received bad news
					about Uncle, for example, but not until Chapter 3 do
					we learn for sure that he has passed away. We know that Uncle was
					taken away in 1941, and that he never returned
					to boatbuilding after his imprisonment, but we don’t know exactly
					what happened to him. Uncertainty also surrounds Uncle’s relationships
					with Emily and Obasan. We know that Emily is Naomi’s aunt, that
					she came to Alberta for a visit shortly before Naomi’s first trip
					to the coulee, and that her departure left Uncle unhappy. We also
					know that Obasan is the woman he was married to until his death.
					What we don’t know, yet, is the exact nature of the relationships
					between these three people. Obasan is not a plot-heavy
					novel, but these minor mysteries give the narrative forward movement,
					and keep us turning the pages.

Chapter 3 gives us our first good
					look at Obasan. Naomi seems both repulsed and fascinated by her
					aunt’s physical presence. She provides a detailed description of
					the gunk that clogs Obasan’s eyes, the chapped skin on her lips,
					her sticky saliva, her ropy neck, and so on. In part, it is Obasan’s
					age, rather than anything about Obasan specifically, that makes
					Naomi uneasy. Her uncle has just died, and perhaps for this reason,
					Obasan’s decrepit body, evidence of her proximity to death, upsets
					Naomi. While Obasan’s age fills Naomi with revulsion, it also, paradoxically,
					inspires her deep respect. As she watches the elderly woman scraping
					the mud from her boots, Naomi muses that old women the world over,
					regardless of their nationality, are the ones who hold the keys
					to the universe. They are, she thinks, the ones who know secrets
					and hoard details.

The family photograph in Chapter 4 gives
					us a glimpse into Naomi’s family and its tensions. Naomi provides
					a few intimations about the conflicts that exist. We know about
					Obasan’s two stillbirths and Stephen’s honored status as grandson,
					for example. But Naomi raises more questions than she answers. Was
					Aunt Emily’s gift of a puppy cruelly or kindly intended? Was Naomi’s
					own birth unimportant compared to Stephen’s? What did the mysterious
					letter from Japan say? By raising these questions, Naomi puts us
					in the same position she was in during her childhood: aware that
					various conflicts existed, but prevented by the adults (or, in our
					case, the narrator) from understanding them fully or grasping the
					details.

