The narrator explains the causes and consequences of the 1830 July Revolution
					in France. After Napoléon’s defeat at Waterloo in 1815, the
					monarchy tries to reassert the rights that it enjoyed before the French
					Revolution of 1789. Since the post-1815 government
					has been hampered by unsuccessful military campaigns and social
					injustice, the monarchy mistakenly believes that it can slowly rescind
					the rights it granted in 1815. When it attempts
					to do so, the government collapses, resulting in the July Revolution
					of 1830.

The new government, however, faces as many problems as
					the old one. The new king, Louis-Philippe, tries to find a middle
					ground among the different political factions but succeeds only
					in alienating all sides. His miscalculations lead to another revolution
					in 1832. Led by Enjolras, student revolutionaries
					begin to organize a massive political insurrection in the Faubourg
					Saint-Antoine, a district of Paris.

Marius continues to obsess over Cosette. He still does
					not know her real name and refers to her as “the lark.” He finds
					a park called the Field of the Lark and goes there every day to
					soothe the pain of his loss. Little does he know that Eponine, out
					of her love for Marius, has tracked down Cosette. Eponine tells
					Marius that Cosette and Valjean are living in Saint-Germain, a Paris
					suburb. Eponine does not tell Marius that she saw Cosette in the
					garden of the house while observing the house on behalf of an imprisoned
					robber. Eponine tells Marius to follow her to the house. He fails
					to realize that Eponine is in love with him and tries to hand her
					a five-franc coin. She sadly lets the coin fall to the ground and
					tells Marius that she does not want his money.

Tucked away in their house on Rue Plumet in Saint-Germain, Cosette
					and Valjean once again live a happy life free of fear. Nevertheless,
					problems begin to develop—not from outside this time, but from within.
					Cosette, who has lived with Valjean since she was eight years old,
					is blossoming into a young woman. She begins to sense that Valjean
					has chosen the seclusion of Saint-Germain for reasons other than
					merely hiding from Javert. Ever since Valjean ended their regular
					visits to the Luxembourg Gardens, it has become clear that he wants
					to hide Cosette from other men. Cosette thinks wistfully of the
					young man in the gardens. Having never had romance in his life, Valjean
					has no personal experience with love to help him relate to Cosette’s
					yearnings for a man she has never met. At the same time, Valjean
					is painfully aware that Cosette is all that he has in life. Losing
					Cosette would mean losing everything.

The street urchin Gavroche overhears Father Mabeuf worrying about
					his finances. Gavroche slips away and sees the murderous Montparnasse
					pounce on an old man. With great agility and strength, the old man,
					whom we recognize as Valjean, defends himself. He pins Montparnasse
					to the ground and lectures him about his life of crime. He then
					gives Montparnasse his wallet and lets Montparnasse go. Gavroche
					deftly picks Montparnasse’s pocket and throws the wallet full of
					money over Mabeuf’s wall. Mabeuf is ecstatic to find a wallet next
					to him, and his housekeeper declares that the money must have come
					from heaven.

After a few months of discord, Cosette and Valjean begin
					to live in harmony again. Their relationship reverts to the bliss
					they enjoyed during Cosette’s childhood. Marius, however, interrupts
					this harmony. He has been spying on Cosette ever since Eponine gave
					him the address of the house in Saint-Germain. One night, he leaves
					a declaration of his love for Cosette. The next evening, after Valjean has
					left for his nightly walk around town, Marius enters the garden and
					professes his love for Cosette. She reciprocates Marius’s feelings.

Back on the streets of Paris, Gavroche continues to practice
					his unique brand of street-smart philanthropy. He discovers two
					hungry, abandoned children and uses the little money he has to buy
					food for them, not realizing that they are his own younger brothers. Gavroche
					then runs into a woman who is freezing in the bitter cold and gives
					her enough of his own clothing to survive the night. Gavroche brings
					the two young boys to his makeshift home inside a giant statue of
					an elephant near the Bastille prison. Later that night, a number
					of criminals escape from prison, including his father, Thénardier.
					Gavroche rescues Thénardier from a rooftop, but his greedy father
					does not realize that his own son is the one helping him to escape.

The narrator devotes several pages to an exploration of
					the rich vocabulary and origins of Parisian street slang.

Like the convent before it, Valjean and Cosette’s house
					in Saint-Germain is a sort of idyllic prison, a tranquil setting
					that creates tension between Cosette and Valjean. While Cosette
					no longer has to endure the severe discipline of the nuns, she no
					longer has any classmates to talk to and has only Valjean and the
					maid to keep her company. Valjean, on the other hand, appears to
					think all is well. Delighted to have Cosette all to himself and
					rid of the threat posed by Marius, he does not realize that his
					efforts to hold on to Cosette only make her more reluctant to stay
					with him. If anything, the isolated location of Saint-Germain leaves
					Cosette with more time to pine over Marius and realize her loneliness.

While Marius’s naïveté is sometimes charming, it also
					blinds him to Eponine’s feelings and makes him unwittingly insensitive
					and selfish. At times, his preoccupation with Cosette borders on
					addiction, resembling Javert’s obsessive pursuit of Valjean more
					than courtship. Marius is so focused on his love for Cosette that
					he ignores Eponine, and he goes so far as to recruit her as a kind
					of carrier pigeon between him and his true love. Without knowing
					it, Marius insults Eponine by trying to pay her for her services.
					Eponine’s response to this abuse is tragic, but we do feel some
					sense of encouragement in seeing a Thénardier act with such selflessness. Eponine’s
					attempts to ensure Marius’s happiness are both sad and noble, and
					they are clearly preferable to the cruel cynicism her family has
					taught her.

Hugo again critiques the French justice system by demonstrating the
					corruption of the Parisian prisons. He suggests that dangerous criminals
					such as the leaders of Patron-Minette can effectively move in and
					out of prison as they see fit, provided they have the right connections
					and enough money to bribe the prison guards. The ease with which
					the Parisian crime ring circumvents the justice system contrasts
					with the tragic circumstances of Valjean, whose petty theft brought
					him a life of hardship and fear. Harsh prison sentences such as
					Valjean’s can be justified only if the law comes down even more harshly
					on murderers. Hugo shows us that such is not the case, however.
					He implies that in French society justice is a resource like any other
					and that anyone who is well connected can exploit it at the expense
					of the unfortunate.

