Lovelace intercepts a letter from Anna, who expresses
					puzzlement at learning from Mrs. Townsend, who arrived at Mrs. Moore’s ready
					to rescue Clarissa, that Clarissa has gone back to Mrs. Sinclair’s.
					She asks for an explanation of her behavior, hinting that if Clarissa
					has given up her fight against Lovelace, but is not married to him,
					their friendship must be at an end. Lovelace does not give the letter
					to Clarissa. She demands that he let her go away, but he convinces
					her to stay until the following Thursday, when her uncle is supposedly
					coming to see her married. Clarissa thinks her uncle’s arrival will
					allow her to throw herself into his protection, so she agrees to
					the plan.

Unable to make any progress with Clarissa through love
					or gentleness, Lovelace goes back to his tricks and puts Dorcas’s
					note to effect. He pretends to find it and to be enraged, drawing
					his sword on Dorcas and shouting at her for betraying his trust.
					There is a great commotion, with all of the whores and servants
					adding to the fuss. Dorcas runs to Clarissa’s door for help, and
					when she steps outside, her natural majesty awes everyone into silence.
					She chastises Lovelace for the contrivance and excoriates the women,
					whom she now recognizes as whores, for the parts they have played
					in her downfall. Clarissa threatens to go to the law for vengeance.
					This frightens the women, and they pretend to take Clarissa’s side.

Lovelace advances on Clarissa, begging forgiveness, but
					she is frightened and thinks he is going to rape her again. She
					holds a penknife to her chest and is ready to kill herself, but
					Lovelace, terrified himself, retreats. He admits that it had been
					his original design to force her back to her bedroom and see if
					he could complete the plan that her unconsciousness had made impossible
					before. Having failed, and seeing Clarissa’s power, he finally gives
					up the cohabitation scheme and tells Belton he will really marry
					her. He leaves for M. Hall to tend after Lord M.

He writes pleading letters to Clarissa, asking her to
					return only four words to say she will marry him on Thursday. She
					will not answer. Lovelace keeps four messengers in constant motion
					to keep up the flow of letters to Clarissa. His uncle seems about
					to die. He asks Belford to visit Clarissa and intercede for him,
					but Belford refuses because he doubts Lovelace’s honesty. He then
					asks Tomlinson to go to Clarissa, which he does but finds that she
					has escaped. At this point, Belford and another friend, Mowbray,
					are at Mrs. Sinclair’s, trying to make sense of the matter. Clarissa
					had offered to give the maid Mabel some of her clothes, and while
					they were changing had taken Mabel’s clothes and left the house
					in them. Those at the house had been deceived, as they could see
					her only from the back, and it takes a while before the mixup is
					discovered. Clarissa is not to be found.

Lovelace writes in distress that Clarissa must be found
					and that he will marry her as soon as he can. He also mentions his
					disappointment that his uncle is recovering. Clarissa writes a barely
					coherent letter to Anna, saying she has escaped again but hinting
					that she has been ruined. In her confused state, Clarissa forgets
					to send the letter to the false name and address they’ve been using,
					so Mrs. Howe gets ahold of it. She writes a scathing letter in return,
					forbidding her to communicate with Anna and moralizing on the costs
					of disobedience to parents. Clarissa writes back meekly, asking
					for news of Anna’s health, since Lovelace’s forged letter had claimed
					that an illness prohibited Anna from writing. Clarissa also writes
					to Hannah, asking her to come see her, and to Mrs. Norton to ask
					whether Mr. Harlowe might be willing to lift the curse on his daughter,
					which she says has already been fulfilled on earth. Mrs. Norton
					replies that her family is still unforgiving. Clarissa writes to
					Lady Betty and to her uncle’s housekeeper to find out the truth
					about Lovelace’s tricks. They confirm that Lovelace had been lying.

Anna sees the letter that had been intercepted by her
					mother and blames Clarissa for her ruin. She asks Clarissa to clear
					up the story if she can. Clarissa says she did not receive the letters
					Anna mentions and explains as much as she knows about how she was
					deceived. Anna laments Clarissa’s horrible fate and encourages her
					to prosecute Lovelace. Clarissa declares that she’s dying, and Anna beseeches
					Clarissa not to give way to her sorrow. Clarissa refuses to go to
					court, saying she could not bear to repeat her story in public and
					that all appearances are against her, as it may seem she had voluntarily
					run off and lived with Lovelace before the rape.

Lovelace is in despair, saying he cannot see beauty in
					any other woman. Nevertheless, he pretends to be cheerful and saucy
					when his aunt and cousin confront him with his deception, and he
					seems to enjoy his ability to manipulate them. He convinces them
					to help him marry Clarissa. They decide to appeal to Anna for help,
					and when they visit her, Anna agrees with them that marrying Lovelace
					is Clarissa’s best option. She encourages Clarissa to consider it,
					but before she gets any reply, she also writes to Lovelace’s cousin,
					Charlotte Montague, frantically inquiring about Clarissa, who has
					disappeared from her lodgings. Lovelace discovers that the whores, thinking
					they were acting for his benefit, had Clarissa arrested for money
					owed them from her past lodgings at Mrs. Sinclair’s. Lovelace frantically
					implores Belford to hurry to the prison and get Clarissa out and
					also to clear him of involvement in this plot. He gets his aunts
					and cousins to sign onto a letter to Anna, explaining his innocence
					in this episode.

Clarissa continues to show her power as she defeats Lovelace’s attempt
					to rape her by seeing through his trick, awes him and his minions
					with her dignity, and is ready to kill herself to avoid dishonor.
					He is finally vanquished, swearing that he will marry Clarissa at
					last. Clarissa also succeeds in making and carrying out a clever
					plan for escape, and for the first time she avoids capture in Lovelace’s
					web. Although she writes to Anna in confusion and makes a mistake
					by sending it into the reach of Mrs. Howe, Clarissa prevails with
					them without any pleading or lamenting: she writes to them with
					dignity and tells her story without sniveling. She blames herself
					for her rashness in writing to Lovelace in the first place and in leaving
					her parents’ house, but she gives Lovelace his full share of blame
					for his villainous trickery.

Thinking she is going to die soon, Clarissa is free from
					any hope or desire other than the lifting of her father’s curse.
					Because the curse included a wish for her punishment in the afterlife,
					and because Clarissa thinks the part of it that applied to living
					life had been completely accomplished, she is terrified of it.

As Clarissa gains in power, Lovelace loses his. His tricks
					no longer work on her, not even when he has all the whores of Mrs.
					Sinclair’s brothel helping him. She at last manages to successfully escape
					from him, and his barrage of pleading letters has no effect, even
					though they are for the first time in earnest. Belford, his best friend,
					refuses a request from him, and Clarissa reveals his cruel tricks
					to his own family. Lovelace loses his coming inheritance when Lord
					M. gets well again, and, most strikingly, his own contrivances begin
					to work against him when Mrs. Sinclair and her whores launch Clarissa’s
					arrest. His star is fading quickly, and nothing seems to be working
					in his favor.

This section reconfigures the allegiances and connections between
					the novel’s characters; all now finally seem to be stepping forward
					on Clarissa’s behalf. Belford is now unambiguously on Clarissa’s
					side and refuses to help Lovelace. The whores, previously Lovelace’s
					assistants in crime, are now unintentionally working against him.
					Clarissa, previously intimidated by Lovelace’s family, contacts
					Lady Betty directly and explains her case. Lovelace’s family is
					still willing to help him, but only to do Clarissa justice, and
					in collaboration with Anna Howe. Mrs. Norton and Hannah reappear
					as Clarissa’s still-faithful friends. Clarissa’s family remains
					on the edges of the scene, unchanged in their obstinacy. Nevertheless,
					the balance of allegiances has shifted from Lovelace’s corner to
					Clarissa’s.

Nevertheless, Clarissa is the real loser in the eyes of
					the world; her will may be inviolate and her virtue pure, but she
					is still a ruined woman. Anna’s and Mrs. Howe’s initial responses
					to her reveal this: although they are eventually won over, even
					Clarissa’s best friend and her mother reject her at first. That
					Anna, especially, would be so ready to condemn her best friend,
					whose virtue she has never doubted, shows just how serious was the
					situation of a woman who was raped. Clarissa’s only respectable
					option would be to immediately marry her rapist, which would bind
					her to a man who had committed an unspeakable violence against her.
					It is implied that anyone but Clarissa would have done this if she
					had the chance—that is, if the rapist would consent to marriage.
					Clarissa’s refusal to marry Lovelace is evidence of her exceptionality:
					She will remain pure, but as a consequence she will have no chance
					of worldly happiness.

Clarissa and Anna both suggest the legal system as a possible
					avenue for justice. Clarissa threatens Lovelace with it before his
					second rape attempt, and although it has no effect on Lovelace,
					it does scare the whores. Their livelihood depends on insulation
					from the legal system, so Clarissa could easily bring down their
					establishment. Anna recommends prosecution as a way to keep Lovelace
					from hurting any other women—including Anna, who knows Lovelace has
					reason to take revenge on her. Clarissa will not do it, however,
					as her delicacy recoils at the public nature of the trial, just
					as it did when Anna suggested that Clarissa make a legal claim for
					her estate. Furthermore, Clarissa recognizes how well Lovelace has
					protected himself. Every appearance is against Clarissa, and the
					only witnesses to the reality of the situation are on his side.
					Lovelace shows no fear of the law, but he is clearly aware of it
					enough to protect himself by manipulating the evidence of his crime.

