The narrator describes the night’s fog as feeling like
					the thin, wispy hair of “maiden aunts.” Jadine, Margaret, and Valerian
					sit at dinner, and Sydney waits on them. Valerian gets irritated
					at how slowly Margaret eats, but Margaret worries that if she eats
					quickly she will make an etiquette mistake. Jadine tries to make
					peace by changing the subject to Christmas. As she does so, however,
					Margaret accidentally leaves the salad utensils on the table after
					serving herself. Valerian, Sydney, and Jadine look horrified by
					the mistake, and Margaret feels ashamed.

Jadine picks up the conversation in an attempt to save
					dinner, but she is unaware that Christmas is a bad topic. The discussion
					turns to whether Michael will come visit, and Valerian says that
					there is no chance he will come for Christmas. Margaret asserts
					that he will because she has invited his favorite teacher, the poet
					B. J. Bridges. She says she hinted about her invitation to Bridges
					to Michael by quoting a line from Bridges in a note, and Valerian
					makes her doubt that she remembered the quote accurately. They continue
					to fight, and Jadine tries to figure out whether their fighting
					is more serious and mean-spirited than it was when she first arrived.
					More important, she wonders whether this fighting is the kind people
					of different ages who have been married for a long time engage in
					or if it is something worse.

Valerian apologizes to Jadine and then is silent for a
					while, and Jadine feels bored. When Valerian speaks again, he says
					that Margaret is nervous that Michael will not come and that he
					is nervous Michael will come. Jadine says she does not remember
					Michael very well and then recalls that when she and Michael last
					spent time together she was in college, and Michael suggested to
					her that she was abandoning her racial history by studying art history
					at the Sorbonne. Valerian expresses frustration at Michael’s view
					of race. He ridicules in particular a scheme Michael had to get
					black women on welfare to make and sell African pots, and he asks
					if Michael’s criticism bothered Jadine. She says that it did a little.
					Although she knew that her roots were not as wonderful as Michael
					suggested, she still felt ashamed that she preferred forms of European
					culture over African or African American cultures. Valerian remarks
					that Michael has not grown up and references The Little
						Prince. When Jadine says she has not read the book, Valerian
					tells her to read it and pay attention to what it means and not
					what it says.

Sydney clears the dishes and continues to serve. Valerian
					tells Jadine she is much more sensible than Michael and adds that
					he feels that Margaret made Michael into a loser. He then says he
					thinks Margaret was too young when she had Michael, and he tells
					a story about how when Michael was little, Valerian would come home from
					work and find Michael hiding in bathroom cabinet, looking for soft
					things and humming to himself. He thinks this indicates that Margaret
					neglected Michael, and he wishes he had attended to him more. Now
					she is ready to raise him, Valerian says, but Michael is too old
					to be mothered. Jadine feels she ought to say something in response
					to Valerian’s recollections, but she does not know what to say.
					There is silence, and then Margaret enters screaming. Jadine and
					Valerian both ask her what is wrong, but she will not answer. Sydney
					and Ondine then come in, and Ondine yells at Margaret to tell them
					what is going on. Margaret finally stammers that there is something
					black in her closet, in her things. Valerian starts to tell her she
					is crazy or drunk, but Ondine sends Sydney to investigate with a gun.
					Sydney returns holding a black man with dreadlocks at gunpoint.
					Valerian asks the man if he would like a drink.

Valerian’s criticism of Margaret at the dinner table emphasizes
					the control and dominance he has over Margaret. By belittling Margaret,
					Valerian maintains his control in the relationship and makes it known
					that he is dominant over her. His control also implies that Valerian
					will not consider Margaret’s argument that they return to the States.
					He also does not let Margaret win the fight because he does not
					want Jadine to think that Margaret is in control. When Margaret
					makes a mistake after serving herself some salad, Valerian looks
					at her as if she should be cast out of society. Yet Valerian seems to
					expect this behavior from Margaret, which is why he reprimands her
					and then acts as if nothing had happened. However, Margaret’s embarrassment
					after the accident displays her deep insecurity, and the mistake
					causes her to feel inferior and stupid. The more Valerian picks
					on Margaret, the more she resents living on the island. Valerian
					is aware of Margaret’s unhappiness but chooses not to notice because
					he is happy there. By ignoring her, Valerian makes Margaret feel
					imprisoned on the island, which leads to their fights getting worse.

Valerian’s story of Michael as a young boy suggests his
					son’s troubled relationship with Margaret. Since Valerian was not
					around during much of Michael’s childhood, Michael was entirely
					dependent on Margaret as a parent and role model in life. Margaret’s
					random interest and disinterest in her son demonstrates her uncertainty as
					a wife and a mother. Since Valerian worked during the day, Margaret
					could not take her frustrations over being a mother and wife out
					on him, and the blame turned to Michael. When Valerian explains
					the various incidents in which he found Michael beneath the bathroom
					sink, he theorizes that Michael’s hiding implies that Michael was
					afraid of Margaret. Margaret’s behavior has changed, and she is
					continually interested in Michael now that he is away. She is convinced
					that if she spends time with him, she will be happy. Although Valerian’s
					story to Jadine proves that he knows Margaret is unhappy, he continues
					to belittle and dominate their conversations and arguments.

Valerian emphasizes the importance of staying youthful
					when he references Antoine de Saint-Exupéry’s book, The
						Little Prince. Valerian tells Jadine to pay close attention
					to what the book means so that she will not lose sight of what it
					feels like to be youthful. The distinction he is drawing is clear:
					In the book, lessons are offered about the narrow-sightedness and
					selfishness of grown-ups, in contrast to the joyfulness and generosity
					of children. Valerian’s point is that what the book actually means
					is that children should never grow up. He says this statement because
					he thinks Michael wanted to grow up too fast, and Valerian believes
					this is foolishness. When Jadine tells the story of how Michael
					wanted her to string cowrie beads or sell Afro combs, Valerian’s
					disapproval with Michael’s suggestion indicates that he thinks Michael
					was too young to have these ideas. He wanted Michael to have an
					innocent childhood full of happiness, but instead he thinks Michael
					matured too quickly and did not enjoy his youth.

Margaret’s description of “black” in her room reemphasizes
					the racial concerns in Tar Baby. When the gathered
					members of the household ask Margaret what is in her closet, she
					can only reply that something black is there. She does not say that
					a man is hidden in the closet. The implication is that she is scared
					as much of the color of the man in her closet as she is of the fact
					that he is a man. Her fear of a different race implies that she
					is uncomfortable around any race that is not white. The relationship
					she has with Ondine seems to be stale, and whenever she is around
					Sydney, she barely acknowledges his presence. She relates to Jadine
					because Jadine is tied to white culture more than black culture.
					Margaret’s relationships with the black characters in the book explain
					why she uses the color black to describe what is in her closet:
					She is uncomfortable around black people, who make her a little
					afraid.

