Mateo Torrez 

The novel’s protagonist, an eighteen-year-old young man on the last day of his life. The anxiety that has kept Mateo isolated for much of his life makes it difficult for him to make the most of his final hours. He is introverted, kind, and gentle, but he wants to be carefree and live his End Day to the fullest. He’s initially suspicious of his Last Friend and foil, Rufus, who encourages him to try new things and take risks. During his final hours, Mateo is inspired by Rufus to leave his inhibitions and fears behind. Most importantly, he embraces that he’s gay as he finds love with Rufus.  

Read an in-depth analysis of Mateo

Rufus Emeterio 

A seventeen-year-old orphan on the last day of his life. Rufus is the second protagonist of the story and a foil to Mateo. A foster child after losing his parents and sister in a tragic accident four months earlier, Rufus is often angry, impulsive, and motivated to act in the moment. He expresses his feelings through photography using an Instagram account. The love and acceptance he finds with Mateo allows him to find peace with his survivor’s guilt.  

Read an in-depth analysis of Rufus

Lidia Vargas 

Mateo’s best friend. Lidia is a single mother whose daughter’s father, Christian, died before she was born. Though she is wracked with grief over Christian’s death, Lidia is a selfless and caring mother to her daughter and friend to Mateo.  

Read an in-depth analysis of Lidia

Malcolm Anthony 

Rufus’s best friend and fellow Pluto. Malcolm’s parents died in a fire which is why he’s in foster care. Even though people assume Malcolm is violent because he’s a tall Black boy, he’s never been in a fight. He is a fiercely loyal friend to both Rufus and Tagoe.  

Read an in-depth analysis of Malcolm

Tagoe Hayes 

Rufus’s other best friend and fellow Pluto. His mother and father abandoned him and his father later committed suicide. He has tics in his neck that he thinks other people perceive as signs of mental illness. He wears glasses and takes them off to let the world blur when he’s stressed. He is a loyal friend who goes to jail to give Rufus time to run. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Tagoe

Aimee Dubois 

Rufus’s ex-girlfriend and former Pluto. Aimee lived in the foster home with Rufus, before being adopted by her aunt. Although Aimee still cares deeply for Rufus, she has distanced herself from their complicated relationship. Aimee uses exercise to cope with her urge to steal things, and distance herself from her parents, who are in prison for robbery.  

Mateo Torrez, Senior 

Mateo’s father. Mateo Senior is in a coma due to a stroke when Mateo gets the Death-Cast call. Mateo Senior is a kind, caring man who raised Mateo on his own after his wife, whom he loved deeply, died in childbirth.  

Patrick “Peck” Gavin 

Aimee’s new boyfriend. Peck is vindictive and jealous of Aimee’s connection with Rufus. He lacks compassion for Rufus on his End Day and is fixated on getting revenge for the beating Rufus gave him.  

Delilah Grey 

A Decker in denial. Delilah gets the call from Death-Cast but thinks it’s a prank from her ex-fiancé, Victor, whom she broke up with the night before. She focuses on her career at the expense of enjoying her End Day to the fullest. 

Victor Gallaher 

Delilah’s ex-fiancé and a Death-Cast herald. Delilah seems to believe Victor is vindictive enough to lie to her about it being her End Day, but he is consumed with fear and panic when he learns that Delilah is about to die.  

Andrea Donahue 

A Death-Cast herald. Cold and unfeeling, Andrea believes she is able to do her job efficiently because she is able to turn off her compassion for the Deckers she notifies of their deaths.  

Vin Pearce 

A Decker who sets off a bomb. Vin detonates a bomb in his former gym because he is angry about his impending death and does not want to die alone.  

Howie Maldonado 

A famous actor. Howie finds fame lonely and wishes he wasn’t spending his End Day surrounded by strangers.  

Kendrick O’Connell 

A member of Peck’s gang. An excellent fighter and prone to violence, he is able to stay his anger when he recognizes Mateo as the boy who gave him the shoes off his feet years ago. 

Dierdre Clayton 

A Make-a-Moment employee. Dierdre is suicidal, but seeing Rufus and Mateo gives her the hope she needs to continue living. 

Dalma Young 

The creator of the Last Friend app. Dalma is hopeful that the Last Friend app will make a difference. 

