After Amelia and George’s wedding, Dobbin must inform Mr. Osborne. He befriends George’s sisters first, thinking they will be on the side of romance. After meeting them at a ball, Dobbin visits the next morning. When he arrives, he finds himself alone with Jane Osborne, who is secretly hoping he will propose marriage. The two engage in a lengthy conversation about marriage and love, each with their own purpose. Dobbin explains that the regiment is going abroad, so George and his father should reconcile. He also reveals that George married Amelia and provides more details. As Dobbin expected, the women are pleased by the elopement story.

Dobbin goes to Mr. Osborne’s office. While Mr. Osborne expects George to marry Miss Swartz, Dobbin asserts that George would never marry for money. Besides, he is already engaged. Mr. Osborne rants about Amelia, compelling Dobbin to defend her and spill the news of the marriage. Dobbin realizes that he is responsible for Amelia and George’s reunion.

That evening Mr. Osborne goes to his study and looks through mementos from George’s life. He takes down the family Bible and crosses out George’s name so that no trace remains. Finally, Mr. Osborne burns his will.

A colonel tells Dobbin that the regiment will head overseas soon, so soldiers should put their affairs in order. Dobbin writes a note with the news to Mr. Osborne and then receives a letter from Mr. Osborne to deliver to George. Dobbin resolves to go to Brighton the next day.

In Brighton, George learns that he’s been disowned and cut off except for 2,000 pounds from his mother’s estate. George blames Dobbin for mismanaging his affairs and talking him into marrying Amelia. However, Amelia doesn’t mind the idea of living in poverty. The entire party talks about how dangerous Belgium might be for the men. Becky declares that she will go with the regiment. Amelia, who blames herself because she thinks George is already bored with her, also decides to go.

The next day, having learned that Mrs. Bute returned home, Becky runs into Briggs. Becky says she will always love Miss Crawley and explains that Mrs. Bute schemed to make her and Rawdon fall in love. Briggs believes that Miss Crawley will never forgive Rawdon. Becky dictates a farewell letter from Rawdon to his aunt. Miss Crawley agrees to see him but not Becky. After they meet, Miss Crawley sends Rawdon a message refusing to reconcile but instructing him to visit her lawyer. The next day Becky and Rawdon return to London, where the lawyer gives them a mere 20 pounds.

From Brighton, the newly married Becky and Rawdon, as well as George (but without Amelia’s participation), continue to plot to regain what they consider to be their rightful places—and rightful inheritances—in their families. Though the couples have few similarities, they follow parallel courses in trying to get back in good graces with benefactors. Becky works as Rawdon’s agent, and Dobbin works as George’s agent. Both of them emphasize the upcoming dangerous campaign in Europe as the main reason to make amends now, while they can still be made. The true reason driving both desires for reconciliation, however, is money. While Becky acts with this knowledge at the forefront, Dobbin tries to reunite the Osborne father and son primarily for the sake of Amelia’s comfort and happiness.

Though readers might expect that the threat of Rawdon and George dying on the battlefield could persuade the elders to forgive the young men, both Becky and Dobbin fail to budge their marks. Miss Crawley and Mr. Osborne remain resolute in their decisions and carry through on their plans in an unemotional fashion. Miss Crawley doesn’t make a new will, which could make readers believe she might yet forgive Rawdon, but the trick she plays on him with the 20 pounds left with her lawyer dispels that notion. Mr. Osborne looks over the mementos he has collected from George’s life with a sense of nostalgia, indicating that in his mind, George has already receded into the past.

The war, which is used as a prop by Becky and Rawdon to get back in Miss Crawley’s good graces, clearly will have very real effects on the characters in Vanity Fair. Readers have already seen the life of one man—John Sedley—destroyed by Napoleon’s invasion of Europe. In Chapters XXIII through XXV, these hints to the outside world become far more impactful and wide-ranging, and military men are shown writing their final goodbyes to their parents. At Brighton, though Dobbin and George deliberately tone down the danger they face for Amelia’s sake, the impending departure looms over many of the conversations. George, once again, shows his lack of husbandly concern for Amelia when he doesn’t forbid her from accompanying the regiment to Belgium and even encourages her to come. Becky intends to go, but she has already proved numerous times that she will always be able to look after herself. Amelia, on the other hand, has never shown any personal strength.

The focus on war in these chapters moves the book out of the realm of domestic drama, which revolves around finding a spouse or acquiring money and status. As the novel turns its attention to an unknown, dangerous future, readers feel a sense of an ending. Both Becky and Amelia are now married, thus bringing a close to what normally would be the most significant chapter of their lives, but this section does not guarantee any happy endings.

