The narrator disagrees with "Moral Writers" who believe that virtue leads to
					happiness and vice to grief.

Lord Fellamar, a nobleman who brought Sophia home from the play, is a
					frequent visitor at Lady Bellaston's house. He has fallen in love with
					Sophia. One morning he visits Sophia for two hours before realizing that he has
					stayed too long. Lady Bellaston is pleased with Fellamar's lengthy
					visit—she is hoping to deflect Sophia from Tom through Fellamar. Lady
					Bellaston advertises Sophia to Fellamar by telling him about her great fortune.
					She complains, however, that Sophia is in love with "one of the lowest Fellows
					in the World  a Beggar, a Bastard, a Foundling." She invites Fellamar to
					dine with them the following day so that she can prove to him that Sophia is
					attached to such a man.

Lady Bellaston is a member of the "Little World," a high-class club. She devises
					a plan for the dinner that night with Fellamar and calls on the assistance
					of Edwards, another member of the club. Specifically, Edwards has to say that a
					certain Colonel Wilcox was killed by Tom Jones in a duel. Sophia faints on
					hearing the news, proving to Fellamar that Lady Bellaston was correct in her
					assertions about Sophia's love for Tom. Lady Bellaston contrives to have
					Fellamar and Sophia meet at seven the following evening. She has secretly been
					encouraging Fellamar to rape Sophia so that Sophia will be obliged to marry him.
					Fellamar is tortured by the thought of the crime, and resolves that his "Honour"
					will subdue his "Appetite." The following day Sophia begs Lady Bellaston not to
					admit Fellamar. Her aunt chastises her, and snides that country girls think
					every man who is courteous to them intends to make love to them.

Lady Bellaston distorts literary examples of rape to try to convince Fellamar to
					ravish Sophia. It is ultimately for Sophia's good, she argues, since Fellamar
					will be a fine husband for her. Fellamar agrees to carry through with Lady
					Bellaston's plan, extolling Sophia's beauty and fortune.

Lord Fellamar enters Sophia's room and throws himself at her feet, offering her
					the world. She rejects him in harsh terms. He grabs hold of her and she screams
					out, but Lady Bellaston has removed everyone from earshot. At this moment Sophia
					hears her father's voice as he thunders up the stairs. She calls out to her
					father, and Fellamar releases her. Squire Western explodes into the room, drunk
					and verbally abusive. Western orders Sophia to marry Blifil. Fellamar thinks
					that Western is speaking of him, and thanks him for the honor of considering him
					as his son-in-law. Western curses Fellamar, who departs as quickly as possible.
					Lady Bellaston chastises Western for his rudeness to so great a man. Western
					declares that he wants a country man, not a city fop, for Sophia. He violently
					drags his daughter down to his coach, swearing to lock her up.

Mrs. Fitzpatrick is the one who betrayed Sophia's whereabouts to Squire
					Western and Mrs. Western. The narrator presents her fawning, obsequient
					letter to Mrs. Western.

At Mrs. Miller's house, Mrs. Honour laments losing Sophia. Jones, thinking
					that Sophia must have died, frantically begs Honour to tell him what has
					happened. When Jones finally extracts the news that Western has locked up Sophia
					and dismissed Honour, Tom is thankful that Sophia is alive. Honour chides Jones
					for not having compassion for her misfortune, since she says that she has always
					taken his part against Blifil. Honour is scared that Western will hurt Sophia.
					She says she wishes Sophia had some of her courage—if her father withheld
					her from the man she loved, she would tear out his eyes. Partridge runs into the
					room to inform Jones that Lady Bellaston has arrived. Jones hides Honour behind
					the bed. Lady Bellaston plops herself on the bed and scolds Jones for not
					contacting her. Then she flirts with him. Lady Bellaston waits in surprise as
					Jones stands awkwardly, not knowing what to do. A very drunk Nightingale
					suddenly bursts into Tom's room, mistaking it for his own. Partridge manages to
					lead Nightingale away. While Tom was occupied with Nightingale, Lady Bellaston
					tried to hide herself behind the bed, coming face to face with Honour. The
					ladies are horrified. Lady Bellaston implies that she will bribe Mrs. Honour,
					after which Honour calms down. Lady Bellaston leaves, shunning Tom's attempts to
					hold her hand. Honour is upset about Tom's infidelity to Sophia, but Tom "at
					last found means to reconcile her."

Mrs. Miller gently scolds Tom for the upheaval in his room the previous night.
					Nightingale and Nancy are married that day, with Tom acting as father to Nancy.
					Before the wedding, Nightingale's uncle tries to intoxicate him and dissuade him
					from marrying Nancy. News arrives during this meeting that Harriet, the daughter
					of Nightingale's uncle, has run away with a neighboring clergyman. This destroys
					his case with Nightingale.

Tom receives three letters from Lady Bellaston summoning him immediately.
					Nightingale enters the room while Tom is reading and reveals that he knows about
					Tom's affair with Lady Bellaston. Tom asks for more details on the affairs of
					Lady Bellaston, but the narrator refuses to repeat Nightingale's words for fear
					of being accused of spreading scandals.

Nightingale's stories greatly reduce Tom's gratitude to Lady Bellaston and he
					realizes that he has been in "commerce" with this lady rather than in "love."
					Nightingale advises Jones that the easiest way for him to rid himself of Lady
					Bellaston is by proposing marriage. Together they compose a letter of proposal,
					to which Lady Bellaston replies that she is offended that Tom is so covetous of
					her fortune. Tom responds that he is insulted by her suspicion and will return
					her gifts to him. At the wedding dinner that night, Mrs. Miller devotes more
					attention to Tom than to Nightingale and Nancy.

Mrs. Miller has received a letter from Allworthy informing her that he and
					Blifil are coming immediately to London. He wishes to reserve the first and
					second floors of her house. The truth is that when Allworthy started paying Mrs.
					Miller an annuity of fifty pounds, it was on condition that he could occupy the
					first floor of her house whenever he came to town. Mrs. Miller thus has to
					comply with Allworthy's wishes, but she is distressed that Jones and Nightingale
					have to leave. Jones says that he does not mind at all. Honour sends Jones a
					letter saying that she is sure he will attain Sophia in the end, but she can no
					longer be of service to him. Lady Bellaston has hired her.

Mrs. Arabella Hunt, a friend of Mrs. Miller's, sends Tom a marriage proposal.
					She is twenty-six and a little plump, but otherwise attractive. She has recently
					been widowed by a turkey merchant who left her a rich woman. Tom is at first
					excited by the prospect of having so much money, but—thinking of
					Sophia—writes a courteous refusal.

Partridge capers into Jones's room with good tidings. He has found out that
					Black George is now a servant in Squire Western's apartment in London, by
					which means Tom may send letters to Sophia. Much to Tom's frustration,
					however, Partridge cannot remember the name of the street on which Western
					lives.

Book XV reveals the extent of Lady Bellaston's wickedness when she attempts
					to convince Lord Fellamar to rape Sophia. Fielding prevents the reader
					from seeing the "rape scene" in a tragic light, however, by the manner in which
					he describes it. Fielding further achieves this by including Lady Bellaston's
					humorous distortions of Classical literary descriptions of rape in Chapter IV.
					Fielding makes fun of many characters on the basis of their poor Classical
					knowledge—such as Partridge, and literary critics.

The introduction of Lord Fellamar, first as a nameless gentleman who takes
					Sophia home from a play and then as a suitor, is indicative of Fielding's
					characterization method throughout the novel—he often withholds
					characters' names until a few chapters after their introduction. This delay is
					perhaps intended to rouse the reader's analytical energies—indeed, the
					narrator urges his reader not to be lazy, but to constantly interpret
					characters' words and actions for themselves. Fielding often provides an
					explanation or analysis himself, but always after some delay. For example, in
					Chapter III Fielding first praises Lady Bellaston's "Little World Society" as
					"an honourable Club," but a couple of paragraphs later refers to it as a
					"comical Society."

The behavior of Squire Western deserves some attention in this book, as his
					rejection of Lord Fellamar stems not only from his conservative nature, but also
					from his loyalty to the country and to tradition. The fact that Western is not
					simply ravenous for the status and riches Lord Fellamar would bring to his
					family, as is Mrs. Western, allows the reader to grant him some integrity.
				

