Though the Golden One undergoes several name changes,
				she herself is fairly static throughout the novella. From the beginning,
				she is haughty and proud, rejecting all society except Equality 7-2521, whom
				she adores from the outset because he is stronger and sharper than
				the rest of her brothers. She becomes subservient to him almost immediately,
				seeking to care for him as early as the third time they meet, when
				she provides him with water to cool himself. By the time she follows
				him into the forest, she has become totally his possession, and
				she remains that way until the end. 

Although she is a static character, the Golden One does
				exhibit extraordinary curiosity when it comes to finding the “I”
				and her uncommon beauty. Though the only reason the Golden One seeks to
				say “I” is to tell Equality 7-2521 that she
				loves him, a far less noble goal than his effort at self-actualization,
				she is nevertheless superior to those around her because she at
				least suspects that there is more to the world than the collective
				equality enforced in her society. Additionally, she stands out from
				the faceless, nameless masses because she is incredibly beautiful,
				a sign from Rand, who views physical beauty as the natural counterpart
				to intellectual and personal integrity, that she is a good character
				in the novella. Despite the poor development of her character, then,
				we know quite a bit about the Golden One’s attitude toward her culture
				and society, and her rejection of both is enough to exalt her in
				the novella to special status.

The Golden One is a problematic character, however, because her
				originality is at odds with her subservience to Equality 7-2521. On
				the one hand, she is the female counterpart to Equality 7-2521 in
				that she is curious and seeks solitude. For this reason, we might expect
				to read a considerable amount about her thoughts and reactions or
				conversation with Equality 7-2521. But the
				Golden One has almost no lines in the novella, and she fades into
				the background when Equality 7-2521 finally
				realizes his own self-importance. On the other hand, though she
				is Equality 7-2521’s counterpart she totally
				abdicates control to him and is remarkably underdeveloped, especially
				considering that she is the only other consistently present character
				in the novella. Though her name is originally Liberty 5-3000,
				she allows Equality 7-2521 to rename her
				the Golden One and, later, Gaea. Her willingness to accept the new
				names that Equality 7-2521 gives her is a
				symptom of her broader willingness to accept the identity that he
				conceives for her. Her subservience and underdevelopment are troubling
				because in her character Rand presents the novella’s only other
				example of goodness in a collective society. But because the Golden
				One has no personal characteristics of her own, she ultimately serves
				as a flat mirror to Equality 7-2521, revealing
				little about Rand’s philosophy that we do not already glean from
				Equality 7-2521.

