Tom’s double role in The Glass Menagerie—as
				a character whose recollections the play documents and as a character
				who acts within those recollections—underlines the play’s tension
				between objectively presented dramatic truth and memory’s distortion
				of truth. Unlike the other characters, Tom sometimes addresses the
				audience directly, seeking to provide a more detached explanation
				and assessment of what has been happening onstage. But at the same
				time, he demonstrates real and sometimes juvenile emotions as he
				takes part in the play’s action. This duality can frustrate our
				understanding of Tom, as it is hard to decide whether he is a character
				whose assessments should be trusted or one who allows his emotions
				to affect his judgment. It also shows how the nature of recollection
				is itself problematic: memory often involves confronting a past
				in which one was less virtuous than one is now. Because The
					Glass Menagerie is partly autobiographical, and because
				Tom is a stand-in for the playwright himself (Williams’s given name
				was Thomas, and he, like Tom, spent part of his youth in St. Louis
				with an unstable mother and sister, his father absent much of the
				time), we can apply this comment on the nature of memory to Williams’s
				memories of his own youth.

Even taken as a single character, Tom is full of contradiction.
				On the one hand, he reads literature, writes poetry, and dreams
				of escape, adventure, and higher things. On the other hand, he seems inextricably
				bound to the squalid, petty world of the Wingfield household. We
				know that he reads D. H. Lawrence and follows political developments
				in Europe, but the content of his intellectual life is otherwise
				hard to discern. We have no idea of Tom’s opinion on Lawrence, nor
				do we have any indication of what Tom’s poetry is about. All we
				learn is what he thinks about his mother, his sister, and his warehouse
				job—precisely the things from which he claims he wants to escape.

Tom’s attitude toward Amanda and Laura has puzzled critics. Even
				though he clearly cares for them, he is frequently indifferent and
				even cruel toward them. His speech at the close of the play demonstrates
				his strong feelings for Laura. But he cruelly deserts her and Amanda,
				and not once in the course of the play does he behave kindly or
				lovingly toward Laura—not even when he knocks down her glass menagerie.
				Critics have suggested that Tom’s confusing behavior indicates an
				incestuous attraction toward his sister and his shame over that
				attraction. This theory casts an interesting light on certain moments
				of the play—for example, when Amanda and Tom discuss Laura at the
				end of Scene Five. Tom’s insistence that Laura is hopelessly peculiar
				and cannot survive in the outside world, while Amanda (and later
				Jim) claims that Laura’s oddness is a positive thing, could have
				as much to do with his jealous desire to keep his sister to himself
				as with Laura’s own quirks.

