Richard’s contentious relationship with his mother may
be traced back to his early childhood, when Ella administers a beating
that nearly kills him. This strife continues throughout Richard’s
early years, as he commits endless punishable offenses in a setting
where his mother is often the only authority figure around to deliver
punishment. Despite her sometimes brutal discipline, Ella is devoted
to her children and is fiercely determined to raise them successfully after
her husband abandons the family.

Ella shows a special tolerance and affection for Richard
that we do not see in any of the other major characters. When Richard
publishes “The Voodoo of Hell’s Half-Acre,” for example, the rest
of the family attacks him, but Ella shows compassion through her
concern that Richard’s writing might make it hard for him to get
a job. Similarly, Ella walks on her weak legs to give Richard a
hug when she learns that he will get a job in defiance of Granny’s
and Addie’s wishes, suggesting that she takes genuine delight in
her son’s success.

	Much of the meaning of Ella’s character lies in her illness,
as she symbolizes those elements of life that are at once unpredictable, overwhelming,
and unfair. In Chapter 3, Ella’s suffering
effectively becomes a symbol of everything wrong with the world
for Richard. In a just universe, he concludes, the unfriendly and
harmful people would be sick, and Ella would enjoy vigorous health,
unimpeded in going about the business of raising her sons and earning
a living. However, the reality is, of course, that Ella is constantly
sick and suffering. In light of the seemingly cruel fate his mother
endures, Richard finds it difficult to deny that the universe is
unjust. The injustice he sees afflicting his mother mirrors the
injustices he himself faces: poverty, hunger, a severely abridged
education, and the mere fact of being black in the Jim Crow South.
Taken together, these accidents of life constitute a major obstacle
that Richard must overcome in order to live the life that he wants.

