In flashbacks, Campbell recalls more scenes from his high-school relationship
					with Julia. Campbell’s friends teased him about Julia, but he would not defend her.
					Campbell also avoided telling his parents about Julia, which Julia suspected. When
					he finally took her to meet them, his parents behaved rudely and refused to invite
					her to a party the rest of the family was attending. Afterward, Campbell began
					ignoring Julia. One day they met at the cemetery, and Campbell told Julia their
					relationship was over.

In the present, Campbell goes to the hospital to speak to Dr. Bergen, the head
					of the ethics committee. Dr. Bergen says the committee never met to discuss Anna,
					despite the fact that Anna had been a patient at the hospital eight times. After his
					meeting, Campbell runs into Julia. He convinces her to talk with him about the case,
					and they go to an Italian restaurant. Campbell avoids answering questions about his
					service dog and why he took the case. He receives a phone call from Anna asking him
					to meet her at the police station. When he and Julia arrive, Anna tells them Jesse
					has been arrested for stealing a judge’s car. She asks for Campbell’s help.
					Reluctantly, he manages to get Jesse released on probation. In the car on the way
					home, Campbell tries to get Anna to tell him what she really wants. She explodes in
					anger and says she’s sick but never sick enough for her family. Campbell is pleased
					at her anger but also worried that she will sound unsympathetic on the witness
					stand.

Campbell arrives at the firehouse with Anna. When he and Brian talk alone,
					Brian admits he agrees with Anna and says he is willing to say so to the judge.
					Brian remembers an incident from the night before in which he shouted at a kid whose
					girlfriend overdosed on drugs. Another firefighter told Brian he could take time
					off, but Brian says that means he would have to be at home instead. Back in the
					present, as Campbell leaves he mentions Jesse’s arrest.

In 1997, Sara finds Kate with blood streaming down her legs. Kate has relapsed
					and needs a bone marrow transplant. The family’s insurance company refuses to cover
					the transplant. To prepare Anna for the bone marrow donation, Sara gives her
					growth-factor shots. Six-year-old Anna tells Sara she hates her. Sara’s sister,
					Zanne, offers to pay for the transplant, but Brian tells Sara the men at the
					fire-station raised enough money. Sara takes Kate to the hospital to begin her
					pre-transplant regimen of chemotherapy. Before she leaves the house, Kate cleans her
					room in case she doesn’t come back. Again, the chemo makes Kate violently ill. The
					time arrives for Anna’s bone-marrow extraction, and Sara tells her she doesn’t have
					to do it but that everyone is counting on her. Sara goes to be with Kate. Brian
					arrives after Anna’s procedure and says Anna has been asking for Sara. Sara feels
					torn but goes to see Anna. Anna says she hurts, so Sara finds a nurse to give her
					medication. When Sara goes back to Anna’s room, she sees Brian putting the locket on
					Anna’s neck.

A few weeks later, Brian takes Sara out to dinner. They have nothing to talk
					about other than Kate and feel like strangers. When it’s time to take Kate home from
					the hospital, Sara notices how different Kate looks. Later, Sara learns that Brian
					lied about the firefighters having raised enough money to cover Kate’s bone marrow
					transplant. When Sara confronts him, he says he used the money from Kate’s college
					fund to help pay for it, because Kate won’t live long enough for college. Time
					passes and Sara tries to get Kate to leave the house, but Kate feels self-conscious
					about her appearance. Sara shaves her own head, and then Anna asks to have her head
					shaved, too. All bald, they go to the mall.

The section makes reference to the novel’s major ethical debate, about whether
					Anna has the right to stop acting as a donor to Kate. In Sara’s flashback to 1997,
					we see that Kate might have died without a bone marrow transplant. Anna, of course,
					served as the donor. In her memory of the time, Sara recalls Anna suggesting that
					she might not want to go through with the painful bone marrow extraction that Kate
					needs to survive. Sara tells Anna she doesn’t have to do it if she doesn’t want, but
					immediately reminds her that she and Brian and Kate are counting on her, essentially
					leaving Anna no room to make her own decision. For Sara, the matter does not require
					any deliberation. Better Anna experience some pain and Kate survive than have the
					alternative scenario take place. But Anna, who will be the one to experience the
					pain, has no say in the matter.

Sara’s flashbacks to 1997 additionally reveal how torn between her two
					daughters she feels at times, although those memories also show that, if Sara must
					decide which daughter to help, she will always choose Kate first. For instance, Anna
					goes to the hospital to give bone marrow for Kate’s transplant at the same time that
					Kate receives chemotherapy, putting the two girls in the hospital together. Sara
					prefers to stay by Kate’s side, and she even hesitates to leave Kate when Brian
					tells her that Anna, who has just gone through a bone-marrow extraction, has asked
					for Sara. Even as Sara speaks to Anna, who says she is in pain, Sara expresses her
					desire to get back to Kate, prompting Anna to cry out that she is in the hospital,
					too. The incident serves as a prime example of Sara’s single-minded focus on Kate
					causing Anna to feel neglected and to demand attention. Anna’s feelings about this
					incident and others like it surface when she shouts at Campbell that she is never
					sick enough for her family.

Sara’s overriding concern for Kate obviously stems from the fact that Kate
					repeatedly verges on death, whereas the problems the other children experience,
					though serious, are not fatal. Sara has great difficulty admitting that Kate might
					die, even as Kate herself seems to recognize the fact. Most notably, before Kate
					leaves for the hospital to receive chemotherapy, she cleans and organizes her room
					in case she doesn’t return. Sara, however, deliberately avoids the prospect of
					Kate’s death. For instance, when Brian admits he took the money for Kate’s
					bone-marrow transplant out of Kate’s college fund because he doesn’t think Kate will
					live long enough to go to college, Sara reacts by literally running away. She locks
					herself in the bathroom and pretends not to have heard him. In many ways, such as
					this refusal to discuss the matter with Brian and her constant care and concern for
					Kate, Sara has built her entire life around avoiding Kate’s death.

Throughout the story, and particularly in this section, Brian appears to be
					more understanding and open-minded than Sara, but we also see that he runs away from
					the family’s situation in a way Sara does not. Specifically, Brian uses work and
					astronomy as ways to avoid dealing with difficulties at home. Most significantly,
					when one of his coworkers suggests he take time off, he refuses, saying that if he
					is not working it means he has to be at home. Although Brian has cared for and
					supported Kate through her battle with cancer, he hasn’t done so to the degree that
					Sara has. But the deliberate distance he has created between himself and Kate’s
					cancer may also be what gives him perspective on his family’s situation, allowing
					him to see Anna’s and Jesse’s problems in a way Sara cannot. That perspective may
					also be what allows him to admit to himself that Kate might die, because unlike
					Sara, his life includes more than the struggle to keep Kate alive.

In addition, throughout this section the reader continues to learn more about
					Campbell’s and Julia’s romantic history, which provides some hints about the secret
					Campbell hides. In his flashbacks to high school, Campbell clearly has strong
					feelings for Julia, but he lacks the strength and maturity to defend her from either
					his peers at school or his parents. When Campbell admits that he stopped calling
					Julia just after she met his parents, it appears the reason he broke off
					communication stemmed from his desire to please his parents and fit in. Certainly
					Julia believed that to be the reason. But Campbell tells the reader, somewhat
					cryptically, that Julia doesn’t know the real explanation, suggesting that the
					secret Campbell has been hiding about himself and his need for a service dog has
					something to do with why he stopped seeing Julia. What the secret may be, however,
					remains unclear.

