Six actors and a three-man band, collectively known as
					the Tragedians, arrive. Their leader, known as the Player, explains
					that the group will perform for a small fee. Rosencrantz introduces
					himself as Guildenstern but quickly realizes his mistake. Calling
					Rosencrantz and Guildenstern “fellow artists,” the Player goes on
					to list the group’s dramatic specialties, which include sexual performances that
					Rosencrantz and Guildenstern may participate in for an extra fee.
					Intrigued, Rosencrantz asks how much it would cost to watch but
					gets confused by the Player’s attempts to bargain. The Player offers
					to do practically anything for a few coins, but Rosencrantz misunderstands.
					The Tragedians prepare to leave.

The Player says that they are heading to the court. Grabbing
					the Player, Guildenstern gets angry, only to relax by asking for
					more details about the performance. The Player responds by urging
					a young boy named Alfred to put on a skirt and prepare to perform. Disgusted,
					Guildenstern begins backing away, but the Player holds onto him.
					Guildenstern punches the Player, tells Alfred to undress, and criticizes
					the Tragedians for being prostitutes rather than actors. The Tragedians
					again begin to go.

Rosencrantz stops the actors from leaving by asking what
					they would do for one coin, which he throws in the air. While the
					actors clamor to get at the coin, the Player stops them and hits
					Alfred. Embarrassed, Rosencrantz says that he intends to report
					on the Tragedians’ practices. Guildenstern stops the actors from
					leaving by offering them a bet. The Player calls heads and wins
					the coin. The Player spins the coin, Guildenstern calls heads, and
					Guildenstern wins. Guildenstern spins again, the Player calls heads,
					and the Player wins. Guildenstern wins the next round, but then
					the Player calls tails. Rather than look at the coin, Guildenstern
					covers it with his foot and says simply, “Heads.” The actors get
					angry at Guildenstern’s automatic assertion, so Guildenstern looks
					at the coin and claims to have won it. As the Player protests, Guildenstern
					spins several more coins, calls them heads, and claims to win each
					time. Guildenstern proposes a new bet: if the year of the Player’s
					birth doubled is even, he wins; if odd, the Player wins.

Upon realizing that doubling any digit always produces
					an even number, the Player explains that they have no money to pay
					Guildenstern. He offers Alfred as payment instead. Alfred says that
					he dislikes being an actor. Guildenstern demands to know the actors’ repertoire
					of plays, because he wants to see a play as payment. Hesitating,
					the Player says that they belong to the “blood, love and rhetoric
					school.” The Player then begins giving his actors directions, all while
					explaining to Guildenstern that he never removes his actor’s outfit
					or gets out of character. The Player refuses to move around or off
					stage, until Rosencrantz approaches. As the Player moves away, everyone
					realizes that he has had his foot on the flipped coin. Rosencrantz
					announces that the coin had actually landed tails, not heads, as
					was assumed. As he throws the coin to Guildenstern, the lights change.

The interaction among the Tragedians, Rosencrantz, and
					Guildenstern introduces elements of homoeroticism into the play.
					The Player explains the very special brand of drama performed by
					the actors, one that lets the audience watch or, for more money,
					participate in sexual scenes. The Tragedians’ unique brand of performance confuses
					the two men, even though the group clearly fulfills an unacknowledged
					social need.

Both Rosencrantz and Guildenstern feel alternately attracted
					to and repulsed by the Player’s offers. Guildenstern gets particularly angry
					about the exploitation of the young Alfred. He tells Alfred to take
					off his clothes, but whether Guildenstern means just the skirt Alfred
					has put on to perform in or everything he has on is not clear. The
					inability of readers to understand what Guildenstern actually means
					is important, as it points to the fact that he himself might be confused
					about his feelings: would he like to have a homosexual experience,
					or not? Is he sensitively protecting Alfred, or is he about to exploit
					the boy even further by forcing him to stand naked? Both Rosencrantz
					and Guildenstern seem unable to decide whether to pursue the sexual
					favors being offered to them, another instance in which they refuse
					to make an active choice or decision.

The Player seems much smarter than both Rosencrantz and
					Guildenstern, and he even appears to be aware of himself as a character within
					a play. He refers to the two men as “fellow artists,” even though
					Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are neither actors nor prostitutes.
					This label implies that the Player somehow realizes that Rosencrantz
					and Guildenstern are actually two minor characters from Shakespeare’s Hamlet, which
					Stoppard has borrowed and transformed into the heroes of his play Rosencrantz
						and Guildenstern Are Dead. This knowledge gives the Player
					a powerful aura of mystery and omnipotence. Later in the scene,
					the Player mentions that he never steps out of character: he is
					always on stage, and he is always acting. These references to plays,
					acting, and performance let Stoppard comment on his play as a play,
					a literary technique known as self-reference, or metafiction. Rather
					than letting readers or viewers lose themselves in a fantastical
					entertainment, Stoppard forces them to constantly be aware of his
					play as a literary work being read or performed. His play refers
					to itself as a play. As a result, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
						Are Dead requires a high level of intellectual engagement
					on the part of its readers or viewers.

Through the character of the Player, Stoppard wryly comments on
					plays as a unique form of entertainment. When Guildenstern asks
					for a play as payment for the lost bet, the Player cannot name a play
					that his troupe knows how to perform. Instead, the Player claims
					that the Tragedians belong to the “blood, love and rhetoric school,”
					implying that the actors know how to perform violence and romance,
					as well as how to communicate. Although the Player seems to be earnestly
					and honestly assessing the actors’ range, he is also being somewhat
					ironic. All plays rely on rhetoric, because by their very nature
					plays consist of actors reciting lines. By speaking their lines,
					actors verbally communicate. In other words, all actors employ rhetoric.
					As the Player explains, however, for a few coins, Rosencrantz and
					Guildenstern may watch a play, but, for just a few more coins, they
					may participate in sex play with the actors. The Tragedians are
					thus both actors and prostitutes, which adds yet another level of
					commentary. Prostitutes perform sexual acts for money, but actors
					also perform for money. Stoppard implies that the difference between
					prostitutes and actors might be as small as types of things performed—and
					the fee received for such performances.

