As the narrator of Farewell to Manzanar, Jeanne
				describes events in a very unemotional and observational way, as
				if looking on from a distance. This tone is effective because it
				helps her keep the factual accounts of the events she witnesses
				separate from her emotions at the time she witnesses them. She is
				careful about how she mixes her own analysis and reflection as a
				writer with the events she is telling as a narrator. The story tends
				to come in waves of information, and between waves Jeanne takes
				a step back and tells us what she thought of things as they were
				happening and how she thinks of them now. These moments of reflection
				combined with the way Jeanne freely jumps in time within chapters
				give the impression that she is writing and commenting on things
				at the same time that she is remembering them. This narrative
				style fits with the nature of the work, which focuses in part on
				coming to terms with one’s memories.

Jeanne’s observational tone derives partly from her age
				at the time of the internment. Throughout the memoir she emphasizes
				that she was young at the time and did not really understand the
				war or the real motives behind the camp. As a young girl she is
				unaware that U.S. fear of Japanese people is behind her family’s
				imprisonment. In fact, she does not see the camp as imprisonment
				at all, but rather as an adventure. As the story goes on and Jeanne
				gets older, however, her view of the world shifts drastically. The
				violent change in her father during the internment years and her
				later discovery of the unspoken prejudice of the world to which
				she returns reveals to her that the world is more complicated than
				she originally realized. Farewell to Manzanar is
				a coming-of-age story, and Wakatsuki begins by describing events
				simply and innocently, much as a child would see them. The
				discoveries she makes about herself during and after her time at
				Manzanar give the memoir its structure and allow us to chart Wakatsuki’s
				progress from girl to teenager to woman. The work is a way for Wakatsuki
				to come to terms with herself, and we must understand how unaware
				of her ethnicity she was as a child in order to appreciate the maturity
				she shows later in struggling with prejudice.

Jeanne’s experiences with prejudice in her school life
				after the war constitute the main content of her memoir and develop
				some of the work’s most important themes, such as the danger of
				racial stereotypes and the difficulty of self-discovery. These two
				themes converge in her story, for she can discover her true self
				only by overcoming prejudice and setting aside her own preconceptions about
				what it means to be either Japanese or American. Only at the carnival
				queen coronation ceremony at her high school in San Jose does she
				begin to understand that until she stops pretending to be what she
				is not, she will never be able to understand who she is.

