The narrator gives a brief history of the Petit-Picpus
					convent. The nuns are an order founded by the Spaniard Martin Verga,
					and their rituals are particularly severe. At any point in the day
					at least one nun is required to pray for the sins of the world while
					another kneels in devotion before the Holy Sacrament. The only men
					allowed inside the convent are the archbishop of the diocese and
					the gardener, who wears a bell on his leg to warn the nuns he is
					approaching. The nuns also run a boarding school. The girls at the
					school live in austerity, but they still manage to fill the school
					with signs of life. By 1840, the hard life
					at Petit-Picpus begins to take its toll. There are no new recruits,
					and the older nuns begin to die off.

The narrator lauds the value of prayer and affirms that
					the principles of democracy and the spiritual benefits of religion
					do not necessarily contradict each other. At the same time, however,
					the narrator delivers a sharp criticism of monasticism—the practice
					of organizing secluded religious sects such as a convent or a monastery. Monasticism,
					the narrator claims, leads only to social isolation and religious
					fanaticism. The girls isolated within the convent do not have sufficient
					opportunities to learn about the world beyond the walls of Petit-Picpus.
					In effect, the convent is a religious prison.

With Fauchelevent’s help, Valjean manages to seclude himself
					inside the convent of Petit-Picpus. Fauchelevent believes that Valjean, whom
					he continues to call M. Madeleine, has lost his fortune and is hiding
					from creditors. Fauchelevent offers to help Valjean find work as
					the convent’s associate gardener. Valjean must first leave and reenter
					the convent, however, since the nuns will immediately suspect a
					strange man who appears out of nowhere.

Meanwhile, one of the nuns of the convent becomes ill
					and dies. The nuns wish to bury her in the convent, but Parisian
					law requires that she be buried in a municipal cemetery. The nuns
					persuade Fauchelevent to fill an empty coffin with dirt and deliver
					it to the cemetery in place of the nun’s body. Fauchelevent is not
					convinced that the ruse will work. When Valjean hears of the dilemma,
					he suggests that Fauchelevent smuggle him out of the convent in
					the coffin. Despite some minor setbacks, the plan succeeds. Fauchelevent
					takes the coffin to the cemetery and is able to retrieve Valjean
					from the coffin by tricking the gravedigger. They return to the
					convent, where Fauchelevent tells the nuns that Valjean is his brother
					Ultimus. The convent hires Valjean and permits Cosette to enroll
					at the convent school. Valjean discovers that he is a natural gardener,
					and he and Cosette remain hidden and happy for some time.




Valjean’s near-burial in the coffin is a metaphor for
					the burial of his criminal past and assumption of a new identity.
					For the third time in the novel, Valjean resolves his problems by
					assuming a new identity, which means that his old persona must die
					for his new one to begin. We have seen this resurrection before,
					when Valjean falls off the Orion and fakes drowning
					before resurfacing in Montfermeil. Here, a literal coffin is used
					to emphasize the idea that the adoption of a new identity requires
					the death of the old one. Each time Valjean seemingly dies and assumes
					a new identity, however, he does more than simply repeat the same
					process. Each new identity puts more distance between Valjean and
					his criminal past. In his first reincarnation, Valjean discovers
					philanthropy and becomes Madeleine. When he rescues Cosette, he
					discovers love and takes on yet another identity. Now that Valjean
					has found genuine peace and seclusion, he sheds his previous identity
					and is reincarnated as a truly happy gardener and father figure.

Hugo’s account of convent life highlights his religious
					philosophy, which embraces Christianity and its values but rejects
					the rigid dogma of the Church and its institutions. Hugo’s simultaneous praise
					of Christianity and disdain for the Church is very much in keeping
					with the beliefs of many contemporary philosophers of the latter
					half of the nineteenth century, who thought that the Church distorted
					the original intent of Christian faith through corrupt, self-serving
					practices. Although Hugo largely avoids explicit criticism of the
					Church in Les Misérables, he does occasionally
					point to the corrupting influence of certain religious institutions.
					In Book Seven, for example, he suggests that the religious isolation
					of convents leads to zealotry and personal imbalance rather than
					any deeper understanding of God. Nonetheless, Hugo respects the
					convent’s inflexibility more than the secular world’s rigid laws.
					The convent’s exemption from the laws governing the rest of French
					society provides Valjean with shelter and with the chance for rebirth.

Although the convent provides safe harbor for Valjean
					and Cosette, Hugo’s negative views of the place imply that Cosette’s entrance
					into the boarding school is a mixed blessing. The boarding school
					has its idyllic aspects, and it will provide Cosette with the kind
					of education that Hugo frequently champions. However, it is also
					a sort of rustic prison. It gives Cosette the opportunity to develop
					her intellect, but it forces her to do so within a secluded life that
					prevents her from developing her emotional and social intelligence.
					This lack of social interaction, particularly with boys, becomes
					more of a problem as Cosette approaches adolescence. This situation
					is optimal for Valjean, since he does not have to worry about Javert
					and since he has his beloved Cosette all to himself. The confinement
					of convent life, however, sows the seeds of a conflict that ultimately
					threatens to drive Cosette away from Valjean.

