Ishmael Chambers, the protagonist of Snow Falling
					on Cedars, is haunted by the trauma of his past. His rejection
				by Hatsue Imada and his brief but horrific experience in World War
				II have left him bitter and resentful. With a broken heart and a
				missing arm, Ishmael sulks around San Piedro, observing other people’s
				lives but having little personal life of his own. Ishmael reports
				what he sees in the San Piedro Review, the local newspaper that
				his father, Arthur, founded.

	As a virtual outcast chronicling the lives and events
				that go on around him, Ishmael plays a role similar to that of the
				most famous Ishmael of American literature, the narrator of Herman
				Melville’s Moby Dick. Like Melville’s narrator, Ishmael Chambers
				watches as his fellow humans are battered by seemingly impersonal
				forces: war, prejudice, and the fierce winter storm that blankets
				San Piedro’s cedars in fresh snow. Unlike Melville’s Ishmael, however,
				Ishmael Chambers must learn to accept circumstances that he cannot change,
				such as Hatsue’s rejection of him and the loss of his arm in the
				war. He must also find the courage and maturity to make choices that
				influence others’ lives. Specifically, Ishmael struggles with the decision
				about whether to change the course of the trial by sharing evidence
				from the lighthouse that will exonerate Kabuo.

	Ishmael is disillusioned and disappointed because he
				thinks there is unfairness and injustice in the world. He insists
				that facts, and facts alone, should decide the fate of individuals.
				This stubborn idealism is poorly suited to the complexities of human
				life on San Piedro, a place where the very geography—the confinement
				of living on a small island—affects the lives and fates of its residents
				just as much as objective truths. In response to his disillusionment,
				Ishmael retreats into a cold and antisocial shell. Feeling himself
				incapable of loving again, he dwells on the legacies of the past,
				unable to overcome memories of the war and wanting to exact revenge
				on Hatsue for her rejection. Ishmael’s challenge throughout the
				novel is to emerge from his shell, move forward from his painful
				past, and become a strong leader as his father was before him.

