The Mole 

An underground dweller discovering the joys of life aboveground. The Mole is an outsider learning about the social mores and customs in the world of the book. The Mole is a small, quick, nervous creature, given to excitement that sometimes leads him into trouble. He is also quick to understand others, which makes him a compassionate friend. He easily endears himself to others, even when he complicates their lives. He also acts as a mediator between other characters who are more given to extremes. 

Read an in-depth analysis of the Mole
 

The Water Rat 

A creature of the river, devoted to finding adventure. The Water Rat is the first creature to meet the Mole and he is far more worldly than his underground friend. A capable and practical creature, the Water Rat is a valuable mentor for the Mole. But he is also a poet and can be impulsive, so the Water Rat also benefits from the Mole’s company and advice.  

Read an in-depth analysis of the Water Rat

The Badger 

A seemingly fearsome inhabitant of the Wild Wood. The Badger does not enjoy socializing, so we see less of him than the other characters. But his thoughtful speech carries weight with his friends, and his stature strikes fear in the hearts of his enemies. This gives him a top spot in the novel’s social order. He is slow to act but is decisive when he makes up his mind. 

Read an in-depth analysis of the Badger

The Toad 

An arrogant blowhard with money to burn and an obsession for the latest fad. The Toad represents the neighborhood’s landed gentry with his large estate, inherited capital, and love of expensive toys. He is also self-centered and takes his friends and comfortable life for granted. The Toad serves as his own antagonist and creates situations that endanger himself and others. In doing so, he damages the community’s reputation and frustrates his friends. 

Read an in-depth analysis of the Toad

The Piper 

A legendary demi-god who is half man and half goat. The Piper makes himself visible to the Water Rat and the Mole during their rescue of the Otter’s lost son, Portly. He is the embodiment of nature’s benevolence, coming to the aid of creatures in need of rescue and comfort. However, he erases memories the animals have of him, leaving them only with positive feelings. 

The Otter 

A smiling, long-toothed, and silky creature who silently appears and disappears. The Otter and the Water Rat are old friends who share a love of the river. His role in the novel is primarily to reunite with his lost son, Portly. In this way he serves as a vehicle for the Mole and the Water Rat to demonstrate their compassion and meet the Piper. 

Jailer’s Daughter 

A beautiful and compassionate young woman who helps the Toad escape from jail. The Jailer’s Daughter feels sorry for the Toad, but by helping him she encourages his bad behavior. Along with her aunt, she helps him escape, even though this poses a risk to her family. Her sacrifice demonstrates feminine altruism. 

Engine Driver 

A train engineer who helps the Toad escape jail. Believing the Toad to be a washerwoman, the Engine Driver feels sorry for him and takes him aboard even though the Toad can’t pay. Together they outrun a train car loaded with police. The Engine Driver represents a working-class fellow who resents police overreach.  

Barge Woman 

Stout woman on the canal also helps the Toad escape the police. The barge woman quickly realizes the washerwoman is actually the Toad in disguise. She tricks him into revealing his true nature. She represents how Toad could lose his reputation if he continues his bad behavior. 

Gypsy 

A wandering entertainer who also helps the Toad escape. The gypsy doesn’t care about the Toad’s disguise and bargains with him for his horse. The gypsy is able to buy the horse for a very low price, but the Toad believes the deal was good. 

The Sea Rat 

A weary wanderer in search of southern shores. The Sea Rat appears briefly to enchant the Water Rat with stories from his life on the move. 

Rabbits 

Hare-brained creatures of the meadow and the Wild Wood. The rabbits are numerous but lack common sense. They are unable to make any impact upon their community and are not taken seriously by the other animals.  

Weasels 

Predatory creatures of the Wild Wood. The novel’s main characters fear the weasels, but the weasels’ defeat at the novel’s end shows that their fearsome reputation was not based in reality. 

Stoats 

Predatory creatures of the Wild Wood. While the other characters treat the stoats with quiet respect, the Mole shows that they are stupid and easily scattered.  

