In many ways, Ellador is Gilman’s ideal woman. Beautiful and athletic, an
				unusual combination in the literature of Gilman’s time, Ellador defies the
				frail, delicate Victorian feminine ideal without seeming in any way masculinized
				or unwomanly. She is intelligent, courageous, and curious about the larger
				world. She is also a career woman: her work as a forester is inspired by the
				praise she received as a child for helping destroy an insect pest that
				threatened Herland’s trees. All of these aspects combine to make
				Ellador a walking rebuke to the stereotype of the modern, “liberated” woman
				as a waspish, unfulfilled man-hater. Gilman means for Ellador to
				exemplify woman’s human potential—that is, woman’s potential
				for wholeness, beyond the conventional boundaries of traditional femininity.
				Given the chance, Gilman is saying, women can be like Ellador: equal to a man
				spiritually, intellectually, and even physically.

Ellador’s mission to the outside world is part of her quest for an
				understanding of human nature in its wholeness. Ellador senses that, despite the
				amazing progress made in Herland, their society remains incomplete as long as
				there is no contribution from the masculine half of humanity. Ellador is driven
				to understand the masculine “other” both through her romantic relationship with
				Van and, at the end of the novel, by exploring the outside world in his company.
				There is still a tentative, unsettled quality to Ellador’s relationship with Van
				at the conclusion of the novel, as though both the characters and the author
				were still trying to figure out what a truly equal sexual relationship would
				look like. In a typically clever reversal of traditional characterization,
				Gilman has Ellador in the role of cool rationalist, not seeing the point of
				nonprocreative sexuality—while Van argues for the emotional, passionate,
				romantic (and traditionally “feminine”) side of sexuality. If the women of the
				future are anything like Ellador, Gilman seems to say, many of our traditional
				expectations will have to be radically revised. 

