Isabel follows Curzon through a wealthy neighborhood but has trouble keeping up. They argue but soon apologize to each other. Curzon shares buttered rolls with Isabel. When Isabel mentions her sister Ruth, Curzon asks if Ruth is why she accepted the slap from Madam. He asks if she feels loyal to the Locktons and explains that she should because they hold her fate in their hands. Then Curzon suggests that she be loyal to the revolutionaries instead, that she could be useful as a spy in the Locktons’ home in exchange for finding the lawyer who holds Mary Finch’s will. Isabel considers the role too dangerous. She only cares about keeping herself and Ruth safe, not politics and war.

Curzon and Isabel carry buckets of water to the Lockton mansion, where Isabel meets Becky Berry, a kindhearted, no-nonsense servant who teaches her how to work in the house. Becky did not expect the Locktons’ return, so she hustles to make tea, clean the house, and purchase lemon cakes. She shows Isabel the kitchen, library, and drawing room and sets her to work. When soldiers pass by the house, Becky and Ruth discuss that Lockton is a Tory even though Isabel heard him claim to be a patriot on the dock. Becky says that in New York, people often “face both ways.” Ruth peels potatoes outdoors, and Isabel feels satisfied that Ruth is safe. They expect a visit from the wealthy Lady Clarissa Seymour, Lockton’s aunt. Becky leaves for the bakery, and Isabel is left to clean and prepare.

Isabel settles into her new routine. As Becky lives elsewhere, Isabel is the one who starts the fires in the Lockton home each morning. She and Ruth sleep on a pallet in the basement. Lockton and Madam often quarrel, and Isabel tries to steer clear of both. Madam finds fault with her at every turn. One day, Madam calls for Ruth, and Isabel is concerned when Ruth stays with Madam all day. Madam intends to dress Ruth up and keep her as a personal servant, a kind of toy, a decision that angers Isabel. Becky scolds Isabel for this anger and shares the story of a previous slave who talked back to Madam, was beaten severely for it, and was finally sold because of a damaged arm. Becky tells Isabel that there are far worse things than being someone’s toy.

Isabel sharpens knives on the back steps while Becky is off watching a parade of Washington’s soldiers. When Isabel is called to meet Lady Seymour who is visiting again, she sees Ruth, dressed up but red-eyed from crying. Madam tells Isabel that her new name is Sal Lockton. When Ruth calls her Isabel, Madam screams at her to be quiet. Isabel returns to the kitchen to help feed the four men in the library. When Becky is called to the women, Isabel remains to serve the men, who discuss the rebellion. They are Tories, critical of the rebel “traitors.” Lockton orders Isabel to the kitchen to fetch jam and more bread. When Isabel returns, she overhears the men talking about paying off rebels to switch sides with money from the wooden crate that held Madam’s undergarments. The men discuss plans about two locations for the payments, paying no attention to Isabel’s presence. She knows what she must do.

These chapters deepen the reader’s understanding of Isabel’s role in the household and her involvement with the revolution, the two parallel plot lines of the novel. Becky Berry is a white servant in the Lockton home who takes Isabel under her wing. She is tough but also compassionate, and she and Isabel develop a good working relationship. These chapters also introduce Lady Clarissa Seymour, another sympathetic character who shows some respect and kindness to Isabel and Ruth. In both cases, although these white women show kindness, they never fully step out of their roles as slave owner and authority figure. They don’t exactly break the rules of the culture and times, but they do bend them.

Madam, on the other hand, never shows any genuine kindness. She steps fully into her role as antagonist by faulting Isabel every chance she gets and toying with and objectifying Ruth by scolding and humiliating her. Isabel begins to show her own rebellious side in these chapters by getting angry with Madam, but Becky calms her down and shares a story of a previous slave who talked back to Madam and was beaten and eventually sold. The seed of Isabel’s rebellion is planted. Her nature bends and twists as the plots unfold, and she tries to discover and honor her innermost self.

When Madam tells Isabel that her new name is Sal Lockton, both the main character and the plot take a sharp turn in retaliation. Depriving a person of her real name is robbing her of her identity, and Isabel will have none of it. Even Ruth, in her naivete, calls Isabel “Isabel” and receives a harsh scolding from Madam for doing so. Previously, with Curzon, Isabel has resisted becoming involved in the revolution, claiming that she only cares about herself and Ruth. However, Madam forces her to change her mind, to turn away from her isolated self-preservation and be willing to spy and report. Isabel believes that Bellingham will help her locate Mary Finch’s will, which will lead to her and Ruth’s freedom.

The Locktons view Isabel and all enslaved people as inhuman. The Locktons ignore their presence as if they are invisible. They consider it a crime for a slave to read or even think. The Locktons talk about secret and private business in their slaves’ presence, completely ignorant of the risk. This practice makes it easy for Isabel to gather information. Lockton and his fellow conspirators discuss using the money in the wooden crate to pay rebels to switch sides, a plot that gives Isabel political capital to spend with Bellingham through Curzon. Although Isabel does not yet act on this information in these chapters, she knows that she has the power to do so. She begins to feel her own personal strength. Isabel also is intelligent enough to realize that the risks are high. She could be beaten, sold, or even killed if she is caught aiding the enemy rebels, but it is a risk she is willing to take.

