Jadine and Son travel to Eloe, Florida. When they get
					there, Jadine cannot believe how rural and small the town looks.
					The first stop is at the home of Son’s friend Soldier. When Son
					talks to Soldier, he uses a lot of slang and a different language
					pattern than the one Jadine is accustomed to hearing. Son asks Jadine
					if she will stay with Soldier and his wife, Ellen, while Son goes
					to see his father. She is reluctant because she has trouble understanding
					the style of speech that Eloe’s residents use and because she is
					upset at the division she notices between men and women. Eventually
					she agrees to stay behind, and Son goes to see his father, whom
					everyone calls Old Man.

As he approaches Old Man’s house, Son thinks it looks
					smaller than he remembered it. While he waits for Old Man to get
					home, Son thinks about his brothers and sisters, all of whom have
					scattered. When Old Man returns, he looks at Son and drops some onions
					onto the floor in surprise. Son asks Old Man if he received the
					money orders Son sent, and Old Man says he did but that he was reluctant
					to redeem them, out of fear of drawing attention to Son’s whereabouts.
					Old Man tells Son that he and Jadine cannot stay together in Eloe
					because they are unmarried and that Jadine should stay with Aunt
					Rosa. Son initially objects to this plan, but Old Man replies that
					since Son told him the truth, he must obey the rules. He also tells
					Son that Cheyenne’s mother is now dead and that Son should be safe
					in Eloe. As Son leaves, Old Man asks Son why he never wrote any
					messages with the money orders. Son is embarrassed and makes an
					excuse that he did not want to give away where he was.

Back at Soldier’s, while Son was gone Jadine grew bored.
					To amuse herself, she began taking pictures of Eloe residents. But
					when Son returns, he angrily grabs the camera away. Jadine is hurt
					and also unhappy to learn that she must sleep at Aunt Rosa’s. They
					go to a dive joint with music, and before Son drops her off for
					the night, they manage to have sex in the car. She thinks no one
					knows about it, but he knows everyone does.

At Rosa’s, Jadine falls asleep right away, but in the
					middle of the night she wakes up feeling claustrophobic. She thinks
					that Eloe is blacker than any place she has ever been and loud with
					plants and animals. Rosa appears, having been woken by Jadine’s
					movements, and she finds that Jadine is naked. She gives Jadine
					a nightgown and refers to her as her daughter. She makes Jadine
					feel ashamed about her nakedness, and Jadine looks forward to Sunday
					when she and Son are supposed to leave Eloe. In the morning Jadine
					finds Son sitting in the kitchen. She thinks he is beautiful and
					wants to sit in his lap but feels constrained by the presence of
					Drake and Soldier, who look at Son with the same admiration she
					feels. They admire him and Jadine both.

Sunday arrives, and while Son drives Aunt Rosa to church, Jadine
					stays behind with Soldier. Soldier tells Jadine about Cheyenne and
					says that Son should never have married her. He asks her if she
					and Son will get married, and she says she does not know but that
					she guesses so. Jadine feels uncomfortable and tells Soldier that he
					asks too many questions. He tells her that she has a temper and then
					asks if she or Son is controlling their relationship. She responds that
					neither of them is controlling it. Soldier tells her this is a good thing
					because Son does not like being controlled. Soldier then tells her
					that she should plan on staying longer in Eloe because Ernie Paul is
					on his way to visit, and Son will want to wait.

When Son returns, Jadine wants to leave, but he persuades
					her into staying by telling her that he will sneak into Rosa’s to
					sleep with her. She reflects to herself that the people of Eloe
					think sex is dirty and strange, but she decides to stay. They go
					for a drive, and she takes pictures until she runs out of film.
					At night Son sneaks into Jadine’s room, and while they make love
					Jadine feels as if she is somehow in competition with Cheyenne.
					Son falls asleep, and Jadine realizes that she left the door unlatched
					when she let Son in.

She imagines that all of the black women from her life
					and from Son’s have crept through the open door and stand in the
					bedroom. This feeling unnerves her, and she tries to wake Son so
					he will go shut the door, but he will not wake. Finally she yells
					at them, and the women bare their breasts to her. One of the women
					present is the woman with the yellow dress, and she holds out the
					eggs Jadine had seen her with in Paris. Jadine begins to cry, and
					Son wakes up. He holds her until morning arrives.

In the morning, Jadine feels like Eloe is “rotten,” and
					she reflects that all those stories she heard about southern small
					towns being pleasant and romantic were lies told by those who could
					not live anywhere else. After she arrives back in New York by herself,
					she waits for Son to arrive, but he does not return when he had
					said he would. At first Jadine does not mind his absence, but as
					time passes, she begins to feel angry and like an orphan again.
					In the meantime, she looks for a place for them to live and analyzes
					the nightmare she had in Eloe.

When Son finally returns to the city, he and Jadine fight
					frequently. She wants him to get an education or to run a store
					with her, and she suggests taking financial assistance from Valerian,
					but Son rejects the idea of asking Valerian for anything. They fight
					physically, with him hitting her and her biting and slapping him.
					She says that she has taken every opportunity presented to her in
					her life and worked to make the best of it, while he has been consistently
					lazy. In response, he holds her out the window by her wrists, and
					she is so scared that she wets her pants. She does not apologize,
					however, and instead asks him if he wants to be “a yardman” all
					his life. He yells that Yardman’s name is Gideon and that all her
					education has been useless if it has not taught her about the world’s
					racial realities and the hardships faced by people like Gideon and
					himself. Once he has gotten his say, he pulls her back in the window,
					and they sweetly make up.

Later, Son proposes going back to work in the shipping
					industry, and Jadine accuses him of wanting to escape now that things
					are hard and of being afraid of New York. He says he can make it
					in New York and that he is not afraid. He also tells her that she
					cannot understand where he is coming from because she is not from
					anywhere, whereas he is from Eloe. Jadine tells him that she is
					fine not being from anywhere if it means not being from Eloe, since
					Eloe is terrible. They continue to fight about the future, but he
					asks her to marry him and she says yes, on the condition that he
					goes to school. He agrees to this proposal but asks that they get
					their own apartment. Jadine begins to fill out applications for
					schools for Son. She is starting to look old and as a result has
					trouble getting modeling work. She talks about Eloe as a cradle
					to Son, and it angers him that she makes living in Eloe sound easy,
					when in reality life in Eloe is very hard. He tries to imagine what
					kind of woman Jadine will be in fifty years and wonders if she will
					grow to be like Thérèse, Ondine, or Aunt Rosa as she ages.

In September, with two weeks to go until registration
					for school, a dividend check arrives in the mail with interest from
					a stock Valerian had given to Jadine. Son refuses to put money from
					Valerian toward his education, and his refusal angers Jadine. They
					both feel that their efforts to save each other are failing, and
					Jadine realizes she is not saving Son from the women who appeared
					in her nightmare, while Son realizes he is not rescuing Jadine from
					Valerian. Son tells Jadine that there is no such thing as mixing
					races and that people either abandon their own race or choose it.
					He says that a black woman who raises her child as white is robbing
					him of his culture. As he talks, he gets increasingly angry and
					physically aggressive and invokes the story of the tar baby before
					leaving the apartment for a few hours.

When he returns, Jadine tells him that to move forward
					they need to forget the past and that he needs to give up his slave
					mentality. She then tells him that anything traced back far enough,
					including his first dime made, is soiled with the taint of a history
					of racial and sexual violence. She says further that if he pursues
					the past, he will only ever get stuck. Furious, Son leaves, and
					when he returns, Jadine is gone. He opens an envelope that contains
					Jadine’s pictures from Eloe and finds that his friends and family
					members all look ridiculous and stupid. He determines that he must
					find Jadine.

The narrator shows the distinction in returning to a slower
					place when switching from Isle de Chevaliers to Son’s small hometown
					of Eloe. Whereas in New York experiences flowed over and through Jadine
					and Son, in Eloe time slows down. Every event of the days is noted,
					and the passing of the hours takes time, especially when Jadine
					longs to return to New York. The slowing of time implies the obligations
					Son still has in Eloe. In New York, Jadine and Son were free to
					create a relationship that was in many ways a fantasy, free from
					responsibilities to family, history, or anything other than their love
					for each other. In Eloe, though, they must confront the fact that they
					are from different cultures and that they value different things in
					their lives.

Son’s values are clear from his deep pleasure in returning
					to Eloe and his willingness to embrace the town’s rules. The soundless laughter
					and the fierce hug he gives to Soldier when he arrives signal a
					deeper joy than he has shown in the rest of the novel. Son instantly returns
					to the rural black slang, which Jadine finds incomprehensible. This
					switch in speech patterns shows how Eloe has stayed with him through
					all these years. The social codes of the place also have real weight
					with him. For example, he is not bothered by having to leave Jadine
					with the women and children while he goes off with the men, nor
					does he put up much of a fuss when his father insists that she must
					sleep at Aunt Rosa’s and not with him. These codes are part of everyday
					life in Eloe, and the codes must be respected even when they are
					broken, such as when Son and Jadine fool around in the backseat
					of his car on the first night of their stay and when he sneaks into
					Jadine’s room to sleep with her on the second night of their stay.
					Although Son seemed to fit in on Isle des Chevaliers, in reality
					he was just changing his outward appearance to match his circumstances,
					whether it was gardening with Valerian, eating with Ondine and Sydney,
					or even flirting with Jadine. None of those experiences altered
					his true self, the one that grew up in Eloe and remained there,
					even during his absence.

The relationship between Son and his father demonstrates
					how much Son considers Eloe his true home. In particular, the significance
					of their names implies that Eloe was an entirely different kind of
					place to grow up. Old Man has been called “Old Man” since he was
					seven years old, and no one calls him Franklin Green. The implication
					is that Old Man is his true name, the one that emerged organically
					from the course of his life. When Old Man had a son, it was also
					natural that the baby was called Old Man’s son until the second
					child was born and the first became simply Son. Franklin Green and
					William Green are the names that the outside world uses for these
					men. In Eloe, the only place where they are truly known, they are
					just Old Man and Son.

For Jadine, Eloe is a nightmare of restriction and oppression.
					She does not understand the rules that keep her set aside with the women
					or prevent her from sleeping in Old Man’s house. To her the rules
					seem arbitrary, sexist, and unfair. In a sense Jadine is uncomfortable
					because of her specific familial history. As an orphan, raised by
					Ondine and Sydney but educated and patronized by Valerian, she has
					never had a true family, one that could tie her down and teach her
					the complex sets of obligations and responsibilities that make up family
					life. Instead she has learned to value her freedom above anything
					else. Her values could be described as cosmopolitan—that is to say,
					she values being a part of a general global community defined by
					tolerance and opportunity, instead of being part of a specific, local
					community defined by obligation and history. Placed in the deeply
					rooted world of Eloe, therefore, she feels oppressed. This sense
					of oppression is also tied to her desire to be free of the burden of
					blackness. Jadine clearly does not identify with the residents of Eloe,
					nor does she want to. Therefore, Eloe is a dreadful place to her, and
					she cannot understand why Son is so drawn toward the town when she
					cannot stand it.

Throughout Tar Baby, the narrator has
					emphasized the connection between blackness and nature, a connection
					that is stressed again in this chapter, when the blackness of the
					night in Eloe frightens Jadine. The narrator also emphasizes the
					connection between nature and a woman’s role as a mother, implying
					that motherhood is a woman’s most natural state. Jadine cleary does
					not identify with these traits and her nightmare brings all of these
					forces together. All around her, black women from her past and from
					Son’s past assemble and show their breasts to her. The women are
					insisting that Jadine should accept her role as a nurturer and propagator
					of the black race, an interpretation reinforced by the eggs that
					the woman in the yellow dress holds. When Jadine rejects this role
					of motherhood, she is also by implication rejecting her blackness.
					The morning following the dream, she rejects Eloe’s ties to the
					past as well when she reflects that Eloe is not full of life and
					does not have a future. Jadine does not want to look back. She wants
					to look forward, and she wants to be free to create her own identity
					outside of the confines of nature, race, sex, and history.

Jadine’s and Son’s different experiences in Eloe show
					that they have irreconcilable values. Just as when Son shared his
					dream of his original dime and Jadine found it to be contemptible
					for fulfilling black stereotypes, the two of them interpret Eloe
					differently. To Son, Eloe is home. To Jadine, the place is a lie
					and a joke, the epitome of rural blacks embracing backwardness and
					closed-mindedness. The arguments between Son and Jadine emphasize
					a difference in their values and upbringings. Their violent argument
					in which he hangs her out the window is a good example of this irreconcilable
					clash. Jadine insists that Son should be educated because that is
					the only way that he can succeed in the real world. This is the
					way Jadine was raised, and she believes that everyone should go
					to school as she did when she was in Paris. However, because Son
					was brought up in a different environment, he does not understand
					the importance of school. Therefore, Son insists that education
					is nonsense because it does not include people like Gideon, Old
					Man, and him in it—“true” black people, in his mind, people who
					represent his roots. By telling Jadine that he does not want to
					give up his roots, Son is saying that he cannot live in her “civilized”
					world.

The connections between youth and power are emphasized
					when Jadine begins to look old while filling out Son’s school applications. Her
					tiredness reflects her loss of control and influence in her relationship
					with Son. Although Son decided to go to school, Jadine—and not Son—is
					filling out the applications. Despite her influence on Son, Jadine
					knows he is not happy with their agreement that he attend school,
					and she sees that Son is only considering it because Jadine will
					marry him if he does. Her aged face also displays her unhappiness.
					Though Jadine tries to convince herself that she will be happy when
					Son is in school, she knows he will not want to be there and this
					knowledge makes her unhappy. Even though Jadine does not voice her
					fears to Son, her worries wear on her face, and the modeling jobs
					are not coming as quickly as they used to because of her tired and
					older appearance. Now, Jadine does not have control over her professional
					and personal life.

Jadine and Son have differing interpretations of the tar
					baby story. The narrator presents fully empathetic characters with
					different points of view, and these views are seen here clearly.
					In the story of the tar baby, a white farmer makes a figure out
					of tar to catch a wily rabbit that wants to steal his cabbages.
					When the rabbit hits the scarecrow, it gets stuck in the tar. The
					more it struggles to escape, the more ensnared it becomes in the
					sticky substance. Son thinks that he is the clever trickster and
					rabbit, and Jadine is the tar baby that has enticed him with fake
					blackness until he has become caught in her and cannot free himself.
					The reason Son cannot free himself of Jadine is because he loves
					her. However, for Jadine, Son is stuck in his imagination of the
					past, unable to free himself and clinging to the tar baby when he
					could just let go. What Jadine does not want to realize is that
					Son is tied to his roots and will never let go. The tar baby story
					helps to identify Son’s and Jadine’s true differences.

Both Jadine and Son argue from a place of honesty that
					is grounded in their personal experiences. In that honest grounding
					is the impact of Tar Baby’s underlying argument:
					that one cannot simply choose to be either rooted or rootless, white
					or black, rich or poor. Jadine and Son are both black, but this
					does not make them the same. While Son is comfortable with his roots
					and has worked hard all his life, Jadine feels more comfortable
					in the white European culture. She does not work hard, since she
					knows Valerian will support her. Therefore, even though Jadine and
					Son understand one another, they cannot completely understand where
					the other is coming from because they were raised so differently.

