Claudius, Gertrude, Polonius, and Ophelia enter. Claudius
					confers privately with Rosencrantz first, then with Guildenstern.
					The stage direction points readers to a specific scene in Hamlet.
					Rosencrantz tells Gertrude that Hamlet greeted them warmly and says
					that Hamlet wants everyone to watch the play. As the group leaves,
					Hamlet enters, trying to decide whether to kill himself. Rosencrantz
					hesitates, trying to decide whether he should approach Hamlet for
					chat. Giving up, he returns to Guildenstern. Ophelia walks in, praying, and
					Hamlet exits with her.

Alfred enters, dressed as Gertrude. Rosencrantz, frustrated
					and confused, grabs Alfred, whom he believes to be Gertrude, from behind
					and covers his eyes. The Player enters, explaining that Rosencrantz
					holds Alfred, and Rosencrantz approaches. Somehow believing that
					the Player’s foot is covering a coin, Rosencrantz reaches down to
					the floor, only to have his hand stepped on by the Player. The rest
					of the Tragedians enter, and they begin a mute rehearsal of The
						Murder of Gonzago, which the Player narrates for the benefit
					of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. The Player explains that the dumb
					show is necessary because language is an ineffective tool for communication.
					As he speaks, the rehearsal depicts the king killing his brother
					and then wooing the widowed queen.

Just as the queen in the dumb show accepts the king’s
					murderous brother as her lover, Hamlet and Ophelia burst into the
					room. Hamlet screams at a tearful Ophelia, declaring that there
					will be no more marriages and urging Ophelia to become a nun. While
					the Tragedians try to continue, Claudius and Polonius enter. Polonius
					comforts Ophelia while Claudius proposes sending Hamlet to England.
					Claudius, Polonius, and Ophelia depart, and the Tragedians resume
					their rehearsal. As they do, the Player tells Rosencrantz and Guildenstern that
					all art must unfold according to a logical trajectory that ensures that
					the characters intended to die do in fact meet their ends. Guildenstern
					wonders who gets to choose which characters die, and the Player
					responds that no one does—characters who are written to die must
					die.

The rehearsal begins again, and while Rosencrantz objects
					to the sordid nature of the play the Tragedians are performing,
					Guildenstern says that he prefers art that accurately reflects life.
					The rehearsal, narrated by the Player, resumes with the dead king’s
					son, Lucianus, losing his grip on reality in the wake of his father’s
					death and his mother’s unseemly remarriage. The stage direction
					indicates that the scene being acted out by the Tragedians is a
					mirror of Act III, scene iv, of Hamlet, in which
					Hamlet kills Polonius. As the Player narrates, Gonzago’s
					Lucianus mistakenly kills the king’s adviser, and the king decides
					to send his nephew to England in the company of two spies. The spies
					and Lucianus arrive in England by ship, only to discover that Lucianus
					has vanished and that the letter that the king gave them to give
					to the English king has been replaced with a letter ordering their
					own deaths.

Rosencrantz stops the rehearsal. The two spies in the
					play are dressed in the same clothes as Rosencrantz and Guildenstern,
					and Rosencrantz thinks he recognizes them but cannot quite place
					them, ultimately deciding that the spies have mistaken him for someone else.
					The Player tells Guildenstern that the play features eight deaths in
					all, and Guildenstern grills the Player about presuming to represent
					death on the stage. The Player responds by claiming that people only
					believe in stage deaths, not real death, and says that audiences believe
					only what they expect to see. As he makes this remark, the spies
					slowly die, and Guildenstern says that death is not something that
					can be acted. The Player throws covers over the bodies of the dead
					spies, and the stage goes black.

Like Guildenstern, Rosencrantz spends most of the play
					in a state of total bafflement, which he occasionally tries to overcome
					through action. In Act I, while Guildenstern tries to figure out
					why the coins kept coming up heads, Rosencrantz contents himself
					with his increasing wealth and does not think too much about the
					situation. In Act II, however, Rosencrantz becomes more and more
					upset with their circumstances, and his anger clouds his judgment.
					He cannot understand why people keep entering and exiting, and he
					despairs over trying to help Hamlet, who walks by muttering the
					“To be or not to be” soliloquy from the play Hamlet.
					Rather than trusting his instincts and going to his troubled friend,
					Rosencrantz merely equivocates back and forth, hashing out the pros
					and cons of helping Hamlet. His anger and confusion prevent him
					from doing anything meaningful or significant, and he misses an
					easy opportunity to cheer up his friend. A few minutes later, after
					Guildenstern tells him to be quiet, Rosencrantz attempts to actually
					do something: he grabs a person whom he believes to be Gertrude
					and tries to make a joke. He wants to ease the tension and inject
					some levity into the situation with Hamlet. But, as it turns out,
					he has grabbed Alfred, dressed to look like the queen. Rosencrantz
					has waited too long to act, and now the moment has passed. Hamlet
					has left the stage.

While Rosencrantz attempts to dispel his confusion through action,
					Guildenstern tries to use reason to figure out what has happened.
					But, as with Rosencrantz, Guildenstern remains utterly confused.
					Guildenstern cannot understand the Player’s cryptic comments relating
					to which characters live and which characters die. He resists the
					idea that some things are fated to occur, even though neither he
					nor Rosencrantz questions how they were magically transported from
					the road into the interior of Elsinore in Act I. Whereas Guildenstern
					wants to know the hows and whys, the Player affects an “it is what
					it is” attitude. Likewise, the Player explains that language is
					inherently ambiguous and only has real meaning when coupled with
					action. Simply sitting around talking means very little and cannot
					change anyone or anything. But Guildenstern protests, claiming that
					he understands death intellectually and therefore has no need to
					act it out. Guildenstern trusts in language to clarify and clear
					up the confusing circumstances in which he and Rosencrantz find
					themselves. However, the Player’s comment about the effect of language
					and action chastises Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. Neither acting
					nor talking is enough. Through his commentary on the dumb show,
					the Player urges the pair to stop talking, to stop equivocating,
					and to start making choices, or acting, in the nontheatrical sense
					of the word.

Art directly mirrors life when the spies enter dressed
					as Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. Upon seeing the spies, Rosencrantz
					stops the rehearsal, because he thinks he recognizes the actors.
					He does not, however, give any sign that he recognizes the actors
					precisely because they resemble Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. He
					merely notes that the coats look similar when he reaches out to
					touch the clothing of the spy that looks like him. Rosencrantz confuses
					the issue still further when he decides that the spies have misidentified him,
					and not the other way around, a confused statement that demonstrates
					his inability to differentiate between life and staged plays. Although
					Rosencrantz wants art to have a story, complete with a beginning,
					middle, and end, Guildenstern prefers art to resemble life as closely
					as possible. That the spies bother Rosencrantz and not Guildenstern
					demonstrates the great extent to which Guildenstern has gotten his
					wish: the dumb show has become their life. The Murder of
						Gonzago, the play that the Tragedians are practicing, depicts
					the recent events at Elsinore, as Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and
					the reader learn from the Player’s commentary. The Player reminds
					Rosencrantz and Guildenstern that life, like the kind of art that
					Rosencrantz wants, has a beginning, middle, and end. He synthesizes
					the pair’s two different definitions of art by telling Rosencrantz
					and Guildenstern that The Murder of Gonzago ends
					in eight deaths. It has a beginning, a middle, and an end, as does
					life, and, like life, which itself always ends in death, the play
					too ends in death.

