Tayo embodies the confluence of Native American and white
				cultures, both present in his ancestry, and in his experience, which brings
				him from the reservation, to the US army, to the Philippines, to
				a Veteran's Hospital, and back to the reservation. Carrying the signs
				of the cultural mixing in his green eyes often makes Tayo bear the
				brunt of a whole society's confusion at the ways in which the world
				is changing. Especially since he never knew his father and was abandoned
				by his mother at the age of four, Tayo encounters great difficulty
				in negotiating his mixed identity and experience. This is exacerbated
				by his Auntie who raises him with the constant reminder of his difference.
				Like most of his peers, Tayo is educated in white-run schools. Unlike
				his friends, however, he often finds the white ways of life faulty
				and continues to respect and to believe in the Native American traditions
				he learns from his family as well. Tayo is prepared to serve as
				a bridge between the older and younger generations of Native Americans.

World War II interrupts Tayo's life, as it does to most
				Americans of his generation. He comes of age on the battlefield,
				amidst tremendous death and destruction. His awareness of the connections among
				of all people and all things makes it incredibly difficult for Tayo
				to kill in a war he does not understand, in a place far from his home.
				The majority of the Native American men who return from World War
				II drown their trauma in alcohol, full of confused anger. Tayo,
				however, is more sad than angry. Painfully aware of the ways in
				which Native Americans were and are mistreated by whites, Tayo is
				not interested in glorifying his time in the army. These characteristics
				allow him to respond to the help the medicine men Ku'oosh and Betonie
				offer.

His lifelong desperation to belong in his family and his
				community, along with his deep-seated belief in the power of the
				old traditions, allow Tayo to take up the challenge offered by Betonie
				and to undertake the completion of the ceremony, which can cure
				both himself and his people. Although he often falters along the
				path, Tayo's acceptance of the Native American mythical world allows him
				to benefit from the aid of accidents, animals, spirits, and the
				elements.

