Naomi found out that the family had to move. At the time
					she didn’t understand, but as an adult she has seen the government
					letters ordering her family out of Slocan. As the family packed,
					Nomura-obasan, Saito-ojisan, Sachiko, and Nakayama-sensei came over. The
					minister led a service. By sitting on a box, Stephen accidentally cracked
					one of his mother’s records. The service continued, and the priest
					broke the communion wafer. Afterward, he said goodbye to everyone
					and went off to lead another service.

Father disappeared one day. People poured out of town
					on trains. One day, Naomi and her family left Slocan. No one told
					Naomi where they were going or where her father was.

Back in the present day, Naomi expects Aunt Emily and
					Stephen to arrive at Obasan’s soon. She feels exhausted with the
					effort of remembering the past, and more broadly with the burden
					of behaving politely, not staring, and trying to disappear. She
					thinks that by delving into the past, she is escaping the present,
					and vice versa.

She remembers talking to Aunt Emily in Granton after the
					conference first mentioned in Chapter 7.
					Naomi says that in 1945, families like hers
					had to choose between moving east of the Rockies and going to Japan.
					She knows that Kenji’s family went to Japan, where they suffered
					greatly. She is no longer in touch with anyone from Slocan.

On that night, she asked Aunt Emily if Mother and Grandma starved
					in Japan. They went for a walk, and Emily said she’d told Naomi
					all she could. She then changed the topic to Nakayama-sensei and
					his attempts to keep the community unified. She said no one in the
					family got their land back, even Uncle Dan, who was an intelligence
					officer in the Far East.

Naomi wondered if the efforts of letter-writers like Aunt
					Emily did any good.

In 1945, Obasan, Uncle, Naomi,
					and Stephen went to the city of Lethbridge, Alberta, and then drove
					to a farm in Granton. They moved their things into a one-room hut
					and went to sleep. By morning, dust had coated everything.

Naomi mentions a newspaper clipping from Aunt Emily’s
					package. The clipping describes the industry of “Jap evacuees” who
					worked on beet farms. Naomi says she can’t stand to remember the
					hardship: the flies that swarmed everywhere, their house, which
					was actually a chicken coop; the bedbugs; the muddy water they boiled and
					drank; the baths taken in the same tub; fainting in the beet fields;
					and being too tired to sing or talk. They stayed there for three years,
					until 1948, when Naomi was twelve. Not until 1949 were expelled
					Japanese Canadians allowed to return home.

Addressing Aunt Emily, Naomi says that the past will no
					doubt repeat itself in a different guise.

In Granton, they received word from Father that Grandpa
					Nakane had died the day before they left Slocan, and that Father
					himself had had an operation. In the summer, the only way Stephen
					and Naomi could cool off was by sitting in muddy water or in the
					root cellar. In school, children tormented them with racist remarks.
					All of the Japanese students were called by Americanized versions
					of their names. Stephen was allowed to play the piano at school.

The pace of the narrative picks up significantly in these
					chapters, and for an important reason: Naomi finds her years on
					the beet farm too painful to think about. Even as she writes about
					them, she protests that she can’t talk about them, that it will
					kill her. Whereas she lingered over small incidents and little details
					in her chapters about Slocan, she races through three years of life
					in Alberta in just a few pages. She also returns to her earlier
					technique of cutting rapidly back and forth between the present
					moment and past memories. This back-and-forth movement relieves
					the agony of staying in one place for too long. The fact that Naomi
					was able to linger for so long in her memories of Slocan suggests
					that they were relatively happy recollections.

Despite their brevity, these chapters are powerful and
					moving. Their spare quality is, in part, what makes them so successful.
					For example, the description of the family’s first night in the
					chicken coop that would be their house is brief and has little of
					the lyricism that characterizes much of Kogawa’s prose. In spite
					of, and because of, this spare quality, it forcefully conveys Naomi’s
					exhaustion, her mute acceptance of disasters she can’t control,
					and her full understanding of the dreadfulness of the family’s new
					living situation. The restraint of the prose reflects Naomi’s wariness,
					stunted reactions, and willingness to endure hardship without a
					lot of melodramatic complaining.

As an adult, Naomi faces some of the same stonewalling
					that made her childhood so perplexing. When she asks Aunt Emily
					about her mother, for example, she gets little more than a pained
					stare and a cryptic remark before Emily changes the subject. While
					Naomi does not react to this kind of evasion in a direct way, she
					is clearly frustrated with her aunt. In part, her irritation stems
					from the fact that Emily is more concerned with the broad issues
					than with specific people—and in Naomi’s view, a bunch of people
					pecking away at outraged letters will have little to no effect on
					anyone. She cares about her family members, not about the issues.

In Chapter 29, one of the most
					arresting in the novel, Naomi gives full vent to her fury. If remembering
					her time in Slocan was bearable, even sometimes enjoyable, remembering
					her days on the beet farm is incredibly painful. She lists the hardships
					she suffered in an anguished torrent, interweaving them with her
					present-day appeals to Aunt Emily. Naomi is furious at the government
					and at the cruelty of people, yes, but she is also angry with her
					aunt for failing to understand the pain and, ultimately, the uselessness
					of reviewing the past. Reliving what happened won’t give Obasan
					the youth stolen from her, or bring Uncle back to life. And in Naomi’s
					view, it won’t prevent future atrocities. As she says, addressing
					Aunt Emily, “Greed, selfishness, and hatred remain as constant as
					the human condition, do they not? Or are you thinking that through
					lobbying and legislation, speechmaking and storytelling, we can
					extricate ourselves from our foolish ways?” In this impassioned,
					vivid, cynical, and compelling chapter, Naomi heaps scorn on the
					idea that the efforts of energetic optimists will enable victims
					to make peace with their pasts, or stop future disasters from occurring.

