A new patient arrives, also named Lisa. The girls decide
					to call her Lisa Cody in deference to the other Lisa. The Lisas
					sit in two different phone booths and have conversations with each
					other, yelling playfully back and forth. The doctors have yet to
					diagnose Lisa Cody. Cynthia suffers from depression, Polly and Georgina
					from schizophrenia, Kaysen from a “character disorder,” and Lisa
					is a sociopath. Soon, Lisa Cody is pleased to discover that she
					is a sociopath as well, a diagnosis that puts her in the company
					of her idol Lisa. Lisa, however, isn’t happy to share her diagnosis,
					of which she is quite proud. She turns on Lisa Cody, acting out
					in order to prove that the other girl’s condition isn’t as severe
					as her own. A competition of illness begins between the two girls
					as Lisa challenges Lisa Cody to match her own self-destructive behavior.
					Lisa accuses Lisa Cody of being a fake drug addict, a suburban imitation
					of the real thing. Eventually, Lisa stuns the ward when she steals
					all the light bulbs and hides them in a closet. Lisa Cody finds
					the bulbs, and, perhaps realizing that she can’t compete, runs away
					from the hospital. When Lisa escapes some time later, she returns
					with the news that Lisa Cody has become “a real junkie now.”

The girls discuss the difficulty of having sex within
					the time limits imposed by the nurse’s periodic checks. They agree
					that five-minute checks leave too little time, but that sex might
					be possible with fifteen minutes. The staff insists on supervising
					guest visits with guests after catching Kaysen performing oral sex
					on her boyfriend. The girls argue about who has a boyfriend and
					who is simply pretending to have one. Lisa says that Georgina will
					lend Wade to Kaysen to test the fifteen-minute proposition. The
					girls advise Kaysen to stop seeing her boyfriend. Lisa urges her
					to find meet someone at the hospital, but Kaysen balks at the prospect
					of having a “crazy” boyfriend. The girls imagine the luxury of half-hour
					checks but mock the possibility as hopelessly out of reach.

The doctor who pressed Kaysen to admit herself to the
					hospital claims that he interviewed her for three hours, although
					she remembers only twenty minutes of it. She wonders whether it
					matters which account is the accurate one. The hospital admission
					report records Kaysen’s entrance at 1:30 p.m.
					Retracing her steps from that piece of evidence, Kaysen concludes
					that she must have spent three hours with the doctor. Other evidence
					appears to contradict the original conclusion. A hospital doctor’s
					note claims that she reached the hospital at 11:30 a.m.
					If this were true, then Kaysen’s twenty-minute estimation must be
					correct. She leaves the responsibility of deciphering the ambiguity
					to us.

The Lisa Cody episode serves as a pocket analysis of the
					original Lisa’s character. We already know that Lisa can be entertaining
					and that she enjoys any novelty that relieves the routine of the
					ward. Lisa Cody is simply a novelty to her. Lisa sparks an immediate
					friendship with Lisa Cody, who shares her interest in mischievous,
					playful behavior. But Lisa cannot tolerate any threat to her status
					as the strongest personality on the ward, and she quickly turns
					on Lisa Cody. Lisa is a sociopath, a uniformly selfish personality
					who insists on serving her own interests exclusively. Her attacks
					on Lisa Cody, performed in front of the other girls, are cruel and
					personal. Lisa Cody can’t help but engage Lisa in competition to
					determine which of them is most daring, but she misses the point
					of the competition. Lisa’s status is already secure, in her own
					mind and in the minds of others; the point of the competition is
					to undermine Lisa Cody’s position and perhaps her own conception
					of self. Lisa wins, of course, in a more dramatic way than even
					she could have expected. When Lisa triumphantly reveals that Lisa
					Cody has become an actual junkie, we understand the depth of Lisa’s
					perverse nature. 

The title of the chapter “Checkmate” refers to the oppressive timetable
					by which the nurses inspect the girls: with five- and fifteen-minute
					checks, the girls are almost never able to engage sexually with
					their boyfriends. Sex is arguably the most pressing urge for adolescents,
					for many, a crucial expression of independence and emerging adulthood.
					Authority’s intrusion on this personal expression highlights the
					extent to which the girls have been stripped of their freedom. The
					girls are resigned to their plight, made clear when Lisa Cody compares
					the likelihood of half-hour checks to winning a million dollars.

Kaysen startles the reader when she revisits her initial
					diagnosis and investigates her memories of that morning. The inquiry
					that follows reveals the nature of a memoir, by definition a subjective
					stringing together of a writer’s memories to fit an agenda, whether conscious
					or not. Kaysen’s anger that a twenty-minute diagnosis resulted in
					her two-year stay in a psychiatric facility is understandable. Earlier,
					we’re told that she had never before met with the psychiatrist,
					who seems eager to confine Kaysen to a mental ward. But in presenting
					hospital admission records and other inconclusive circumstances,
					Kaysen confesses that her memories are an uncertain guide. Kaysen
					unsettles us by demonstrating that even paper evidence can be as
					unreliable as memories. This weakness of judgment and memory appears
					elsewhere in the book, a warning to readers that every voice of
					authority, even the narrator’s own, should be questioned.

