She hoped for a son; he would be strong
					and dark; she would call him George; and this idea of having a male child
					was like an expected revenge for all her impotence in the past.

Part Two begins with a description of Yonville-l’Abbaye,
					the town to which the Bovarys are moving. The most notable features
					of the town are the Lion d’Or inn, the pharmacy of Monsieur Homais,
					and the graveyard, where the gravedigger, Lestiboudois, also grows potatoes.
					The village folk await the arrival of the evening coach. It arrives
					late, carrying Charles and Emma. The delay has occured because Emma’s
					little dog escaped and ran away during the journey.

Charles’s correspondent in Yonville, a pompous, obnoxious
					apothecary named Homais, dines at the inn with the newly arrived
					Bovarys. His boarder, a young law clerk named Leon, is invited to
					join them. While Charles and Homais discuss medicine, Emma and Leon spend
					much of the meal discovering their affinities. Emma learns that
					Leon also loves romantic novels and lofty ideals. Sharing these leanings,
					the two feel an immediate closeness and believe that their conversation
					is quite profound. When the Bovarys arrive at their new house, Emma
					hopes that her life will change for the better, and that her unhappiness
					will finally subside.

Leon thinks about Emma constantly. Charles’s medical practice
					gets off to a slow start, but Charles is excited about the coming
					of the baby. Finally, the baby is born. It is a girl, contrary to
					Emma’s wishes. They name her Berthe, and Charles’s parents stay
					with them for a month after the christening party. One day, Emma
					decides to visit the baby at the house of her wet nurse, who asks
					her for a few extra amenities. On the way there, Emma feels weak,
					so she asks Leon to accompany her. Rumors begin to spread through
					the village that they are having an affair. After the visit to the
					nurse’s house, Emma and Leon go for a walk by the river, during
					which they feel passionately romantic toward each other.

The superficiality of Emma’s romanticism becomes clear
					in her interactions with Leon, who shares her love for sentiment
					and passionate excess. Emma’s conversation with Leon at dinner is
					trite and sentimental—they discuss how books transport them away
					from their everyday lives—but to the two of them, it seems rapturous
					and meaningful. She challenges her stable but unsatisfying marriage with
					a relationship that is based on falsely profound declarations rather
					than true sentiment.

	The birth of Emma’s daughter underlines the materialism
					of her sentiments, but it also introduces some of the novel’s feminist
					arguments. Emma desires to be a maternal figure only when it seems
					as though the role might be glamorous. As soon as she realizes that
					she can’t buy expensive clothes and furniture for the baby, however,
					her interest fades, and we see that her only interest in the child
					is as a vehicle for her own desires. Emma dreams of having a son
					because she believes that a male child will have the power she lacks.
					This frank statement shows that Flaubert was aware and perhaps disapproved
					of the abridged liberties afforded to women in the late nineteenth
					century. Emma observes that “a man, at least, is free; he can explore
					all passions and all countries, overcome obstacles, taste of the
					most distant pleasures. But a woman is always hampered.” Emma’s
					lovers always enjoy freedom that she cannot.

	Flaubert’s description of the mundane world around Emma
					is realistic, but somewhat exaggerated. He uses flowery, poetic
					language to describe Yonville, writing that “the country is like
					a great unfolded mantle with a green velvet cape bordered with a
					fringe of silver.” But Flaubert also recognizes the banality of
					the setting as “a mongrel land whose language, like its landscape,
					is without accent or character.” By describing the same scene in
					contrasting ways, Flaubert accomplishes two effects. First, he sets
					himself apart from his romantic predecessors, who would have appraised
					a dull scene as unworthy of their attention. Second, he contrasts
					the banality that Emma sees with the beauty that an outsider might
					instead perceive. Flaubert thereby establishes that while Emma may
					be right about the boredom of village life, she is also missing
					a layer of beauty that her perspective is too narrow to contain.

	The villagers who surround Emma provide us with a context
					for historically understanding Emma’s social position. The wet nurse whom
					Emma visits, for example, lives in a small hut with the children
					she nurses. When she sees Emma, she begs her for little necessities—a
					bit of coffee, some soap, some brandy. Although Emma remains unhappy
					because she can’t socialize with the aristocracy in Paris, her visit
					to the wet nurse reminds us that she is comparatively well-off.
					The village innkeeper, meanwhile, is a down-to-earth woman whose
					only concerns are whether the meal will be served on time and whether
					the drunkards who frequent the inn will destroy the billiards table.
					Although she does lack imagination, she also represents something
					that Emma is not: a woman who accepts and enjoys her lot in life.

