In rural Iowa, the government unveils the Thompson Harmonizer,
					a new super-weapon, the result of the mysterious Project X. Although he
					has known nothing of it, Dr. Robert Stadler finds himself being credited
					with its creation and coerced to speak at the unveiling event. The
					weapon uses sound waves to destroy all living things within its
					radius. Dr. Floyd Ferris convinces him it is necessary to control
					an increasingly hysterical population. The stunned and horrified
					audience watches as a farmhouse and some goats are torn to shreds
					by the machine, but no one comments. Wesley Mouch declares it to
					be a wonderful instrument of peace.

Dagny calls Rearden to tell him she is alive. When she
					returns to the office, she learns that the government has passed
					the Railroad Unification Plan. Under it, all the railroads will
					pool profits and distribute them according to the mileage of track
					each railroad maintains. Taggart stands to make a huge profit because
					it owns the most track. Eddie is meeting with Cuffy Meigs, the head
					of the Unification Board, who is in charge of the new plan. Under
					his orders, trains are being rerouted and used as favors for influential
					friends. 

Jim insists that Dagny appear on a radio show that night
					to reassure the public that she has not deserted and that the railroads
					are safe. She refuses. Later, Lillian visits her and tells her that
					her affair with Rearden will be exposed if she does no go on the
					air. She agrees to appear. When she speaks on the air, she proudly
					tells the public about her affair with Rearden and about the blackmail
					used to force him to sign over the rights to Rearden Metal. When
					she sees Rearden later that night, he finally confesses his love
					for her, although he already knows he has lost her to the man she
					truly loves. Her speech on the radio had been delivered in the past
					tense. When she tells him that her love’s name is John Galt, he
					is astonished. He suspects where she has been. 

Jim Taggart is pleased with a deal he has just arranged.
					Argentina has been declared a People’s State, and d’Anconia Copper
					will be nationalized in less than a month. Knowing this in advance,
					Taggart transfers his investments from d’Anconia Copper to a new
					company, which will control its assets after the nationalization.
					Aware that he will make a fortune he feels a vague desire to celebrate.
					He hopes that his wife, Cherryl, will give him the admiration he
					seeks, but she is no longer in awe of him, having realized his true
					nature in the year since their wedding. She has learned the true
					story of the John Galt Line, and suspects some terrible evil in
					Jim. When he drinks a toast to destroying Francisco, she leaves
					in disgust. 

Cherryl goes to see Dagny. She offers an apology for accusing Dagny
					of being the weak and evil one at Taggart. She knows now it was
					Dagny who created all the success and Jim who was wrong. Dagny accepts
					her apology and offers to help Cherryl. She talks about the evil
					of giving to the undeserving and about the importance of justice,
					and Cherryl finally feels she is understood. 

Back at Jim’s apartment, Lillian Rearden appears. She
					has come to ask Jim to use his influence to prevent Rearden from
					divorcing her, but he cannot help her. In a final attempt to hurt
					Rearden, she has emotionless sex with Jim. 

When Cherryl returns, it is clear Jim has been unfaithful.
					He admits it and says he will never give her a divorce, and she
					is stuck with him. She asks why he married her. He tells her viciously
					that he married her because she was worthless, because he wanted
					her to accept his love as alms. She realizes that he really married
					her because she was struggling to rise above the gutter, and it
					was this struggle he wanted to destroy. She tells him he
					is a killer for the sake of killing, and he slaps her. She runs
					out into the street, where a social worker sees her and tells her
					that her despair is a result of her selfishness. This is too much
					to take, and she jumps off a bridge and drowns.

Project X reveals the extent to which the looters’ regime
					depends on sheer brute force. The monstrous machine, built using
					scientific principles discovered by Dr. Stadler, demonstrates what
					is created when the mind is used by the state for its own ends.
					With the machine at its disposal, the government has become a true
					dictatorship, able to dominate its people through threats and violence.
					Stadler’s willingness to participate in the unveiling marks the
					final collapse of his integrity. He has known nothing of the project
					and realizes that his name is being associated with it to make the
					public more accepting. At first, he is outraged at being used and
					horrified by the machine itself, but he does as he is told, even
					agreeing to read the speech prepared for him by the government.
					He now stands fully with the looters.

The Railroad Unification plan is another example of the
					absurd efforts of the government. But this time there is no effort
					to even hide the absurdity or pretend that the good of the nation
					will be served. The plan benefits only Taggart Transcontinental
					and the well-connected Jim Taggart, who is credited with delivering Rearden
					to the looters. Taggart has been using the tracks of other railroads
					to get around the destroyed tunnel but is not responsible for maintaining
					them. Meanwhile, Taggart owns more track than anyone, but most of
					it is unused. By crafting the plan to reward income based on amount
					of track owned instead of service provided, Taggart will reap huge
					profits. Smaller railroads will maintain the lines it is using,
					and its own lines will carry almost no traffic. The most successful
					railroad under the plan would be one that owns the most track but
					runs no trains at all. 

Dagny’s radio address is a triumph of reason and honesty
					over deceit and denial. At first, she refuses to appear because
					to do so would imply her endorsement of the Railroad Unification
					Plan and would suggest the industry is not in shambles. Both would
					be lies. But when she learns of the blackmail used on Rearden, she
					welcomes the opportunity to avenge him. She is not bothered by publicly
					revealing her affair with Rearden. As she has said before, she is proud
					of it, and her own opinion is the only one that matters to her. Dagny
					does not believe in the separation of the mind and body that would
					make her physical desires base and shameful. For her, the desires
					of the body are connected to the rational perceptions of the mind.
					She and Rearden desired each other because of their respect and
					admiration for each other. 

In stark contrast to the passion Dagny and Rearden have
					shared, Jim and Lillian’s encounter is tawdry and cheap. They are
					not motivated by respect or admiration, or even the desire for a
					moment’s pleasure. They are drawn to each other by their need to
					destroy Rearden. The only words spoken between them is Jim’s reference
					to Lillian as “Mrs. Rearden.” Lillian is still married to Rearden
					and believes she can hurt him with her infidelity. Rearden, of course,
					is far beyond caring, but Lillian does not know that. Finally, the
					picture of Jim is now complete. He is, as Cherryl accuses him, a
					killer for the sake of killing. He is a nihilist, seeking and enjoying
					the destruction of others. Although the rest of the looters are
					motivated by the quest for power and money, Jim does not enjoy these
					things the way he enjoys destroying men of integrity. His desire
					to celebrate the Argentinean deal has less to do with the fortune
					he stands to make than with the prospect of Francisco’s ruin. Throughout
					his life, he has been driven to destroy the strong, capable people
					around him. Unable to accomplish his goal, he has chosen Cherryl
					as a substitute, because she is easier to destroy. 

In Cherryl Brooks, Rand presents a true victim. Cherryl
					endures a profound transformation, from worshipping the best in
					people and believing she has found it in Jim, to comprehending evil
					in its purest form. When she sees Jim laid bare as the
					killer he is, she finds herself trapped. Though Dagny can offer
					her a brief refuge from the evil, she has no form of escape, either
					from her marriage or ultimately from the society in which Jim’s
					values prevail. Her suicide is her way out, just as withdrawal from
					the looters’ world is the strikers’ way out. 

