Meanwhile, Théoden and the Riders reach the outer hills
					of Rohan after a hard three days’ journey. Éomer, Théoden’s son,
					urges his father not to go further east, but Théoden insists on
					going to war. Gathering the remaining Riders of Rohan, Théoden decides
					to ride to the Hold at Dunharrow, where the people of Rohan have
					taken shelter in anticipation of war. He finds Éowyn, the Lady of
					Rohan, waiting there among her people, and he orders the host to
					rest for the night.

At dinner, Merry waits at Théoden’s side, fulfilling his
					duties as the king’s new squire. Théoden further explains to Merry
					the legend of the Paths of the Dead, speculating about whether or
					not Aragorn will survive. A messenger from Gondor enters the tent.
					Merry is startled by the man’s armor, as it reminds him of Boromir.
					The stranger brings a red arrow—a summons, sent only in times of
					great peril—from the Steward of Gondor. Théoden states that six
					thousand Riders will set out for Minas Tirith in the morning, but
					that they will not reach Minas Tirith for a week.

There is no sunrise the next morning; a great Darkness
					has descended, and all the land is buried under a terrible gloom
					emanating from Mordor. As the host prepares to leave, Théoden asks Merry
					to stay behind when they pass the city of Edoras. The ride to Gondor
					will be hard and swift, and none among the Riders can afford the
					burden of carrying the hobbit along. Merry is sorely disappointed,
					but the king has made up his mind. Éowyn, however, escorts Merry
					to a small booth and outfits him as best she can in the armor of
					the King’s Guard. She bids Merry farewell and returns to her tent.

In Edoras, Merry loses all hope of going to Gondor until
					a young and slender Rider offers to carry Merry with him secretly
					to battle. The Rider introduces himself as Dernhelm. Merry gratefully accepts,
					and soon Théoden’s host departs for Minas Tirith.

The terrible gloom emanating from Mordor reminds us that
					the war brewing in Middle-earth is more than a political wrangling.
					It is not just a dispute over stolen property (the Ring) or a battle
					over territorial claims (the realm of Gondor). Rather, the war is
					portrayed as a cosmic battle with universal implications. The darkening
					of the sky is strikingly reminiscent of the transformation of the
					heavens described in the Book of Revelation in the Bible, associated
					with the Day of Judgment. We have already seen the Dead returning
					to life in the parade of the Oathbreakers in the Paths of the Dead,
					mirroring the resurrection of the deceased—one of the events linked
					to the Day of Judgment in Christian doctrine. On Judgment Day, a
					fierce battle and a darkened sky foreshadow a cataclysmic change
					not just in the political setup of nations on earth, but also in
					the nature of existence. Tolkien makes clear references to the Book
					of Revelation to heighten the cosmic importance of the War of the
					Ring and to underscore its moral and philosophical import.

Merry’s touching insistence on marching to Minas Tirith
					with the warriors provides a moment of lighthearted sentimentality
					to balance the gloom of the war preparations. Théoden’s fighters
					are grave and determined, rugged in their fixation on the battle
					looming before them; Merry, in comparison, seems as childlike as
					his name—like a toddler who wants to accompany the adults. The soldiers’ rejection
					of Merry’s wish to participate emphasizes the gravity of the war.
					It also shows us that the mission of the Ring is more than a series
					of steps to be taken by the Company, but a rite of passage for the
					hobbits. Up to this point, they have led a rather sheltered existence
					in the Shire, but now they are called on to perform an act of maximum
					universal significance. In doing so, they have the potential to
					attain a heroic status they have never held before. If Merry seems
					like a child trying to grow up, so are all the hobbits on their journey.

