As Ember’s citizens gather for Song Rehearsal Day, Lina wonders if the mayor will enjoy sitting alone in his storeroom once the electricity has gone out. She and Doon return to the Pipeworks and at the spot marking “E” for “Exit,” they review the instructions and find an iron ladder leading down to a ledge on the riverbank. There they see a rectangular space carved in the river wall and, within that space, a door and panel holding its key. In the dark spaces behind the door, they stumble upon metal boxes, one labeled “Candles” and the other “Matches.” Lina and Doon are confused at first, having never seen either object, but after several attempts they figure out how to use both and are excited to find a source of portable light. Now lighting the rooms with a lit candle, they discover a much larger object labeled “BOAT.” Unsure of its purpose, they refer to the instructions, and finally, the Builders’ exit strategy becomes clear: They are to lower the boat into the river with ropes, step inside, and then head downstream. The river, they now know, is the way out of Ember.

Lina and Doon explore the hidden spaces near the riverbank’s ledge and discover an additional room loaded with hundreds of boats. They agree to share their good news at Harken Square the following day during Singing. At home, Doon packs his pillowcase with essentials for the departure and checks on his worm. He marvels as it wriggles from its cocoon, completing its transformation into a moth. Doon opens his window and sets it free. He then overhears three city guards, who say he’s wanted for spreading vicious rumors about Mayor Cole. Doon's anger grows when he realizes the guards are in on the mayor’s crime, but he calms himself and escapes to warn Lina. 

Lina and Doon hide out in Ember School, still planning to reveal their discoveries at the Singing, but they grow despondent when they realize the mayor and his guards will be there. They decide, then, that their only recourse is to escape on their own that day and leave a note with trustworthy Clary so she can convey the exit plan to the city. As Lina slips off to deliver the note, though, the guards spot her and set off in pursuit.

When Lina and Doon put their theories to the test and look for the rock marked with an “E,” their methods for success indicate that they are becoming more mature. They encounter new mysteries in the form of candles and matches, but because they work as a team they solve the problem correctly and are able to deduce what purpose the other items serve. Their ability to solve problems together now extends far beyond decoding words, and they are able to deduce the purpose of previously unknown objects. Figuring out that the river is the means of egress from Ember is a serious paradigm shift for the pair who were told there is only darkness beyond the Unknown Regions from The Book of the City of Ember. This highlights how mature their thought processes have become.

Doon’s realization that there is a greater power finally allows him to tamp down his own emotions for the greater good when he senses that Lina is in danger. His hubris had led him to envision a single dramatic moment in which everyone would learn of his brilliance simultaneously, but he is humbled in the presence of his worm. Despite Doon’s advanced problem-solving abilities, he still makes his best decisions when he stops to think things through. The time he spends in solitude with this rare creature allows him the mental bandwidth to employ deductive reasoning and recognize that whatever power turned it into a moth is greater than that of the Builders, and presumably himself. This leads him to the logical conclusion that he and Lina are better as a team than as individuals, and that he must save her.

Lina and Doon are able to successfully leave Ember only once they learn to trust their emotions over their initial impulses. Lina’s bravery allows her to act quickly when the blackout presents her with an opportunity, but it is her pivot from action to emotion as soon as the Singing begins that leads to a successful outcome. Lina is always running, and this forced stillness of her body allows her to assess her priorities. The forced quiet time also compels Doon to reassess his priorities and conclude that Lina is foremost among them, and his relief upon seeing her proves that he is correct. With their trio now firmly and irrevocably in place, Lina and Doon can finally be brave enough to do what is necessary without stopping to second guess themselves, or become distracted by childish impulses.

