“You make all kinds of mistakes: but
						as long as you are generous and true and also fierce you cannot
						hurt the world or even seriously distress her.”

Lena feels restless, unable to paint, and she goes back
					to the pond where she went skinny-dipping. She gets absorbed in
					her painting there, a feeling she loves, but she’s startled by splashing
					in the water. When she peeks at the pond, she sees Kostos swimming
					naked—and he sees her. She realizes that this pond is Kostos’s private
					territory and that last time, when she thought he was spying on
					her, he really wasn’t.

Bridget writes to Lena, telling her she knows something
					big is going to happen. That night, restless, she goes for a walk
					and thinks about her brother, Perry, and the fishing they used to
					do together. She can’t remember her mother in the scene. Bridget
					feels tired, but she wants to see Eric. She goes quietly to his
					cabin and sees him through the window. Awake, he follows her outside,
					walking some distance away from the cabin. He tells her he both
					did and didn’t want to see her. They have a physical encounter.
					Later, Bridget cries in her sleeping bag, realizing that she never
					thought much about what would happen after she and Eric kissed.
					She’s overwhelmed by how much she feels right now.

Lena writes to Tibby and says she now knows that the pond
					is Kostos’s private spot. She says she feels stupid, but she’s also
					glad that Kostos finally looked right at her. She asks if Tibby
					has heard from Bridget.

Carmen answers the phone at home at night, knowing that
					her mother’s lawyer boss, who calls all the time for help with things,
					is on the line. She lies and says her mother isn’t home. Carmen
					tries to eat, but she hasn’t had an appetite since she came home.
					She’s annoyed by her mother, Christina, even though she vowed not
					to be anymore. Albert’s wedding is in three weeks, but they haven’t
					called each other. She feels immensely guilty about what she’s done.

“Wish for what you want. Work for what
						you need.”

Effie tells Lena that she made out with the Greek waiter,
					Andreas, even though she has a boyfriend, Gavin, at home. Effie
					chastises Lena for missing her chance to make out with Kostos. Lena
					suspects that Effie, who always has a boyfriend, is going to grow
					up to be happier and more loved than Lena will. She begins drawing
					a portrait of Kostos. She is so absorbed in the work that she doesn’t immediately
					see Kostos outside her window. Shocked, she wonders if he saw her
					drawing.

Bridget’s friends hound her for information about what
					happened with Eric even before Bridget gets out of bed. Bridget
					feels vulnerable and confused, and she tells her friends that nothing
					happened. Bridget misses breakfast, stays in bed during a soccer
					match between two other teams, and skips lunch.

Carmen tries to write to Albert, but every time she tries
					to start a letter, she slips in something mean. She mails him all
					her money, without a letter.

Lena lies in her bedroom, worrying about Bridget, whom
					she knows sometimes suffers from her free spirit. She goes downstairs and
					asks Grandma why Kostos lives with his grandparents. Grandma explains
					that Kostos once lived in New York City and had a little brother.
					One day, Kostos’s family went for a drive and got into a car accident.
					Kostos was the only one to survive, and he was sent to Greece to
					live with his grandparents. Grandma is so saddened by the story
					that Lena finally tells her the truth: that Kostos didn’t attack
					her. Lena cries because Kostos and Bridget, whose lives have been
					touched by sadness, are still willing to fall in love, while she
					herself isn’t.

After Bridget has a physical encounter with Eric, she
					faces a situation that she can’t conquer with energy, high spirits,
					or her characteristic abandon. Until this point, Bridget has found
					the pursuit of Eric exciting. It’s been a challenge, and she has
					faced two major obstacles: the rule forbidding coach/camper romances
					and the difference in their ages. Sneaking to the bar and to his
					cabin made her seem courageous, fun, and a little reckless to her
					friends, and she liked showing off for them. Bridget has also found
					Eric’s attention exciting, since it’s clear that he thinks she’s
					attractive. All of these things made pursuing Eric fun. What Bridget
					is not prepared for is actually succeeding in her
					pursuit. When her interactions with Eric were part of the chase,
					they seemed harmless, challenging, and exciting. Bridget knew just
					what to do: keep coming up with ways to see Eric and keep flirting
					with him to increase his interest. But when their interaction becomes
					serious, when Eric gives in to his feelings instead of resisting
					them, Bridget doesn’t know how to handle the consequences. She has
					suddenly done something brand-new, something serious, something
					she can’t just laugh off or brag about. Something big has happened
					to her, and Bridget does not yet have the emotional skills to make
					sense of it. Brashares does not describe the encounter for the reader,
					nor does Bridget describe what really happened between her and Eric
					to her friends.

Lena sees her extreme beauty as an obstacle to finding
					true love or romantic happiness. Throughout her life, she’s gotten
					lots of attention for being beautiful, but this attention always
					fades, because Lena is very shy. Unsure about how to connect with
					people and distrustful that boys like her only for her looks, Lena
					has become introverted and withdrawn. She’s most comfortable and happy
					when she is alone, painting or walking. What Lena wants most of
					all is to blend in or even be somewhat invisible, and her beauty
					prevents her from doing that. However, being in Greece shows her
					that she may be missing out on happiness. Effie is warm, open, and
					charming, which makes her instantly likable to their grandparents
					and irresistible to boys, who want to have her as a girlfriend rather
					than just admire what she looks like. Lena envies Effie, even though
					Lena is the one always being praised for being gorgeous. Kostos,
					who has seen great sadness in his life, doesn’t hesitate to follow
					his heart, a quality that Lena is beginning to admire. Beautiful
					Lena is, at heart, a lonely girl, and she knows she needs to transcend
					her beauty and allow others to see what’s inside. She blames others
					for only seeing her from the outside, but she’s actually responsible
					for holding people at arm’s length.

Both Lena and Kostos enjoy skinny-dipping in the secluded pond,
					which suggests that both of them feel truly free only when they
					are alone. Lena, self-conscious about her beauty, usually wears baggy,
					unattractive clothes to avoid calling attention to her body. At the
					pond, however, she feels so alone and so free that she takes off
					all her clothes, feeling indescribably happy as she swims. Her reverie
					is disturbed, of course, by Kostos, who winds up seeing her naked.
					For his part, Kostos is not self-conscious about his appearance,
					but he has grown up under the watchful eye of people like Lena’s
					grandmother, who are convinced that he’s perfect. He also holds
					the weighty grief of losing his entire family. At the pond, he too
					finds the freedom to become completely himself, alone and unwatched.
					Just as Kostos interrupted Lena’s swim, Lena interrupts Kostos’s,
					and she sees him naked as well. Both Kostos and Lena have seen each other
					at their most vulnerable moment, but this moment is also when they
					are most fully themselves. Though Lena thinks Kostos doesn’t understand
					or know her, the fact that they have seen each other this way suggests
					that they are more aligned than Lena suspects.

