The night still young, the boys leave the Duke and spot
					a drunken old man singing a sentimental song to himself. Alex instantly
					detests him, and without speaking, the boys rough him up a bit.
					When they finish, however, the man continues singing, and Dim has
					to punch him in the mouth to quiet him. The old man starts complaining about
					the state of the world. Interested, Alex stops attacking him and
					asks the old man to go on. The man frantically expounds on how an
					old man can’t live in this world anymore, because the young are
					permitted to prey upon him. He concludes that he’s not afraid of the
					boys, since he’s too drunk to feel their punches and too worthless to
					care if he dies. The boys take this as permission to keep beating him,
					which they do until the old man vomits blood. 

The boys continue their walk. By the Municipal Power Plant, they
					encounter another young thug named Billyboy with his five droogs.
					Billyboy tosses aside a young girl he had been planning to rape,
					and a fight ensues between the two gangs. Very quickly, Alex and
					his droogs gain the upper hand, and they’re poised to pummel Billyboy
					when they hear sirens. The gangs scatter, and Alex’s droogs duck
					into an alleyway between flatblocks, the connected tenements that
					line the town blocks. Here they catch their breath, lit by the moon
					and the blue television screens of hundreds of apartments. Alex
					notes that tonight the State is showing a worldcast program, meaning
					a program broadcast globally. He also notes Dim’s rapt fascination
					with the moon. Annoyed, Alex reminds Dim that there’s much to attend
					to on the ground, and that now would be a good time to get a car.
					Alex then leads the boys to the cinema, where they steal an almost-new
					Durango 95.

After some time spent terrorizing pedestrians, Alex drives
					his droogs into the countryside for what he calls “the old surprise
					visit,” which involves breaking into a house and then beating and
					possibly raping its occupants. They stop at a cottage, marked with
					a sign that reads “HOME.” Alex knocks on the front door and asks
					the woman who answers if he can use her phone and get a cup of water for
					his ill friend. The woman replies that she doesn’t have a phone, but,
					lulled by the courteous tone that Alex affects, she steps away from
					the door to get him some water. Alex slips the chain off the door
					and the four enter the house, donning their masks. Inside the house,
					they find the woman and her husband, a writer. Though the husband
					demands that the boys leave, the droogs pay little attention to
					him. Alex and Dim look at the manuscript on his typewriter, and Georgie
					and Pete head toward the kitchen to raid the pantry. Alex mockingly
					reads aloud from the manuscript, titled “A Clockwork Orange,” before
					tearing it to pieces. The writer lashes out angrily at Alex, but
					Dim restrains him. Dim then beats the writer soundly, and as the
					wife watches, horrified, it seems to Alex that her screams follow
					the rhythm of Dim’s punching fists. Georgie and Pete return, laughing,
					with their mouths and hands full of food. Disgusted, Alex orders
					them to drop the food and hold the writer while he and Dim take
					turns pinning down and raping the writer’s wife. Dim and Alex then
					exchange places with Georgie and Pete. After they finish, the droogs
					trash the house, stopping short just of letting Dim defecate on
					the carpet. Alex orders them back out to the car, which they take back
					to town.

The chilling banality of Chapter 1’s concluding sentence—“Still,
					the night was still very young”—assures us that the violence we
					have already witnessed will continue in the coming chapters. Alex doesn’t
					disappoint us in that regard, and in this chapter, he and his droogs
					commit increasingly sadistic acts of cruelty. Alex remains wholly
					unconcerned with the effects of his wickedness, and with what it
					can get for him beyond unmitigated carnal pleasure. He seems to
					have a disinterested attitude toward money, stealing it from the
					corner store in Chapter 1, but not bothering to take any from the
					writer’s house in Chapter 2. The hospitalizations and severe physical
					injuries caused by his gang’s attacks seem of little consequence
					to him. What truly matters to Alex is the visceral ecstasy he feels
					when dealing a punch, slashing an enemy, or raping a woman. These
					acts take on an aesthetic significance for him. In Alex’s hands,
					violence becomes elegant and artistic. He describes his razor, for
					example, as something he can “flash and shine artistic.” Likewise,
					brutality brings out the rhythmic, colorful, and poetic linguist
					in Alex. Violence heightens his powers of metaphor and description,
					as he delightedly notes the pouring of blood (“in like red curtains”),
					the color of a woman’s nipple, and the “four-in-a-bar” screaming
					he hears during sex. 

For Alex, violence represents a kind of artistic creation,
					and he approaches acts of brutality like a composer or painter.
					His verbal playfulness reflects this, as when, for example, he slyly
					asks the writer’s wife to “Please let him have a cup of water? It’s
					like a faint, you see.” The woman thinks that Alex’s friend is about
					to pass out from thirst, while Alex implies that he’s “feinting,”
					or deceiving, her in order to break into her house. Like a painter
					or composer, Alex also has specific aesthetic ideas about his art
					that he won’t compromise. He berates Georgie and Pete for their
					vulgar laughing, and Dim for his attempt to defecate on the carpet.
					In Alex’s eyes, these are crass gestures, and have as much place
					at a beating as they would in a concert hall.

During the droogs’ nighttime rampage, a clearer picture
					of A Clockwork Orange’s dystopian environment begins
					to emerge. Certain elements of the novel refer explicitly to events
					of the 1960s, when Burgess was writing the novella. The car that
					the boys steal, for example, is a Durango 95, a real car manufactured
					in Britain in the 1960s. Also, the drunken old man rambles about
					putting men on the moon, a worldwide preoccupation at the time.
					More important than these specific historical allusions, however,
					are the ways in which Burgess satirizes the rise of both totalitarianism
					and mass market culture, by combining elements from both communist
					and capitalist societies into a single, fictional society, one which
					is heavily State-run, and which exploits the controlling power of
					both totalitarianism and popular culture to the fullest. The cinema
					and the television worldcast are both government-sponsored entertainments,
					as are found in communist countries. From the alleyway between the
					flatblocks, Alex watches as the middle-class citizens dutifully
					receive and consume this prescribed entertainment. Numbed, the people
					are kept safely in their houses—a situation that not only ensures
					the citizens’ security, but also assures the security of the State,
					since a citizenry occupied by their television sets is unlikely to
					be assembling with other citizens, planning rebellion and threatening
					the State’s carefully constructed order.

Besides the seductive pull of State-sponsored television
					programs, thugs like Alex and his droogs also keep citizens isolated
					and indoors: while the boys believe they’re prowling the streets,
					they are, in a sense, also patrolling them. Before Alex beats him
					senseless, the drunken old man provides insight into how the government
					incorporates youth violence into its overall scheme of social stability: “It’s
					a stinking world because it lets the young get on to the old like you
					done.” The old man implies that the government tolerates and even
					indulges youth violence. Without safe locations in which to gather
					and speak to one another, the citizens of Alex’s world have no opportunity
					to assemble and criticize the government. Thus, even though they
					style themselves as rebels, Alex, Billyboy, and their respective
					droogs end up acting in the interests of the government, who engender
					allegiance to the State by creating fear and a sense of insecurity
					in the rest of the citizenry. 

Through the as-yet-nameless writer, Burgess expresses
					one of the book’s central themes, the danger of mindless totalitarianism.
					The writer’s manuscript includes the passage: “The attempt to impose upon
					man, a creature of growth and capable of sweetness . . . laws and
					conditions appropriate to a mechanical creation, against this I raise
					my sword-pen.” When Alex reads this passage, he doesn’t understand
					it; however, the fact that Alex has named his own narrative after
					that text suggests that the writer’s theories will become significant
					in later chapters.

