The entrance to the cave is concealed, and Dumbledore
					determines that it requires an offering of blood to open. Dumbledore
					cuts his hand and drips blood onto the stone, opening the passageway.
					They reach a small pool of water with a green glow emanating from
					the center. Harry attempts a Summoning Charm on the green glow,
					but something very large and white erupts from the water in response. Dumbledore
					tells Harry that it is there to protect the Horcrux. Standing at
					the water’s edge, Dumbledore waves his wand and summons a tiny boat
					on a copper chain. Harry and Dumbledore start sailing toward the
					green light. Harry sees dead human bodies floating in the water,
					and Dumbledore tells him that they should not worry about them yet,
					and that like most creatures that dwell in cold and darkness, they
					are afraid of warmth and light.

The glow is coming from a stone basin filled with green
					liquid. Dumbledore conjures a crystal goblet and tells Harry that
					the green potion must be drunk before they can retrieve the object
					at the bottom of the basin. Dumbledore tells Harry that it’s his
					job to see that Dumbledore continues drinking, no matter how painful
					it is for Dumbledore. Harry hesitates, but Dumbledore reminds him
					of the conditions of the trip. Dumbledore drinks three and a half
					goblets of potion before he falls over. Harry gently lifts the goblet
					to Dumbledore’s lips and pours the remaining liquid down his throat.
					Harry repeats this process eight times. Dumbledore collapses and
					mutters for water. Harry tries to use an Aquamenti spell to fill
					the glass, but the water disappears as soon as Harry brings it to
					Dumbledore’s mouth. Harry is forced to plunge the goblet into the
					lake, and the disruption makes the bodies start moving toward the
					island.

Harry fights them off as best he can, and Dumbledore manages
					to cause an eruption of fire, which sends the Inferi—the bodies—back into
					the water. Dumbledore grabs the locket from the bottom of the stone
					basin, and he and Harry climb back into Voldemort’s boat and retreat.
					Harry Apparates back to Hogsmeade with Dumbledore at his side. Dumbledore
					is extremely weak and unable to walk. He tells Harry that he needs
					Snape to treat him. Madam Rosmerta, owner of the Three Broomsticks,
					rushes toward them. The Dark Mark is currently visible over Hogwarts.
					Dumbledore asks Rosmerta for brooms, and he and Harry fly toward
					the school. When they arrive at the Astronomy Tower, directly under
					the Dark Mark, they hear footsteps coming from the opposite direction,
					and Dumbledore motions for Harry to back off. The door bursts open,
					and a voice shouts, “Expelliarmus.” Harry is paralyzed.
					Although he knows that Expelliarmus is not a freezing
					charm, Harry realizes that Dumbledore has nonverbally frozen him
					under his Invisibility Cloak.

The voice turns out to be Draco Malfoy’s. Dumbledore’s
					wand has been tossed from his body. Draco spots the two brooms and immediately
					asks who else is in the tower. Dumbledore asks Draco who else he
					is working with, and Draco tells him there are Death Eaters at Hogwarts,
					fighting off Dumbledore’s guards down below. Dumbledore tells Draco
					to get on with it and kill him, but Draco simply stares at Dumbledore.
					Dumbledore smiles and tells Draco he, Draco, is not a killer, and
					that his heart is not in it. Draco still does nothing, and Dumbledore
					notes that Draco is afraid to act alone. Dumbledore asks him how
					he smuggled Death Eaters into Hogwarts, and Draco tells him he used
					the Vanishing Cabinet that Montague was lost in last year. Draco
					explains that there is another Vanishing Cabinet at Borgin and Burkes,
					and together they make a passageway. With Dumbledore’s prodding,
					Draco admits to being behind the cursed necklace and poisoned mead.
					Draco tells Dumbledore that Snape is a double agent and has been
					lying to Dumbledore. Even now, Dumbledore insists that Snape is
					trustworthy.

Dumbledore infers that Draco put Rosmerta under an Imperius Curse
					and had her wait in the bathroom with the necklace. Dumbledore then
					tells Draco that if Draco were really going to kill him, he would
					have done it by now. Draco responds by telling Dumbledore that he
					doesn’t have any options, and that Voldemort will kill Draco and
					his family if he doesn’t complete the murder. Dumbledore is sympathetic
					and tells Draco that the Order can help him hide. Draco lowers his
					wand. Suddenly, four Death Eaters burst through the door. They all
					command Draco to finish Dumbledore, but Draco still does not move.
					Snape bursts through the door, and, for the first time, Dumbledore
					looks frightened. Snape raises his wand and shoots a blast of green
					light straight at Dumbledore. The force throws Dumbledore out the
					window to fall to the ground below.

The search for the first Horcrux reveals just how difficult
					it is going to be for Harry to collect and destroy all of the remaining
					pieces. Rather than simply stashing the locket in a cave, Voldemort
					has ensured that only the most sophisticated, resourceful wizards
					even have a chance at retrieving the Horcrux. The quest also clearly requires
					two people working in perfect unison. There is no way that Dumbledore
					would have been able to drink the entire basin full of potion without
					Harry’s gentle coaxing, yet the boat Voldemort hid at the bottom
					of the lake was really only designed to fit one wizard. But because
					Harry is young and consistently underestimated by Voldemort, he
					is able to squeeze inside along Dumbledore. The idea that teamwork
					is essential to ridding the world of evil is emphasized once more.
					While Voldemort only works along, avoiding the help and friendship
					of others, Harry and Dumbledore must work in unison, feeding off
					of each other’s strengths and covering for each other’s weaknesses.
					Even Voldemort’s Death Eaters are disposable to him, and he feels
					no loyalty or indebtedness toward them. He is perfectly ready to
					kill the entire Malfoy family despite their loyal service.

Dumbledore makes the ultimate self-sacrifice, giving up
					his life to protect Harry and Hogwarts. When Harry and Dumbledore
					first reach the basin of poisonous potion, Dumbledore does not pause before
					beginning to drink and has the foresight to remind Harry that Harry
					may need to force the liquid down Dumbledore’s throat. Even though
					the poison is painful to consume and strips Dumbledore of all of
					his strength, he finishes drinking it. He then manages to save himself
					and Harry by conjuring the fire that will push back the attacking
					Inferi. When they return to Hogwarts, Dumbledore heads straight
					for the Dark Mark over the astronomy tower and immediately freezes
					Harry when he hears someone heading up the stairs. Dumbledore uses
					a nonverbal spell to conceal Harry under his Invisibility Cloak
					and clearly does not want to risk anyone knowing that Harry is also
					in the room lest his life be placed in jeopardy. However, Dumbledore’s
					quick thinking seems to point to his omniscience, as if Dumbledore
					has known all along exactly what is going to happen and wants to
					make sure that Harry does not try to intervene in any way.

When Draco beings talking to Dumbledore, he is clearly
					unsure whether he can proceed with his given task. Although Draco
					does not seem enthusiastic about the opportunity to murder Dumbledore,
					the threat of Voldemort killing both him and his family is palpable
					and real. Slowly, it begins to appear that Dumbledore is actually
					just stalling Draco and possibly waiting for Snape or another member
					of the Order to arrive. Meanwhile, whether Dumbledore knows that
					Snape will murder him remains unclear. It is obvious that Dumbledore
					would like to prevent Draco Malfoy from being the one to cast the
					deadly blow, and the reader can only wonder if this is because he
					has already made arrangements with Snape, much like he made arrangements
					with Harry, for Snape to be the one to cast the final blow. While
					Draco stumbles, waiting for backup to arrive, Harry is forced to
					sit, helpless, under his Invisibility Cloak, just as he did on the
					Hogwarts Express when Draco caught him eavesdropping. Now the earlier
					episode can be seen to foreshadow the novel’s climax.

