“Of the thirty-six ways of avoiding disaster,
						running away is best.”

Carmen walks angrily to the woods, wondering if Albert
					will try to find her. Worried that her father might call the police,
					she heads home. But when she gets home, she sees through the window
					that the whole family is sitting around the kitchen table, saying
					grace and eating dinner. Carmen knows she’ll never belong. Enraged,
					she hurls a rock through the window. Albert sees her before she
					runs away.

Bridget writes to Tibby about how much she loves being
					outdoors.

Lena tries to find Kostos at the forge. She waits for
					him outside and calls out to him when he sees her, but, other than
					a brief nod, he ignores her.

Carmen runs back to the woods. She wants to go home to
					Maryland. In the middle of the night, she sneaks back to Lydia’s
					and gets her belongings, then finds a bus station and takes the
					first bus home. Once there, she sends the Pants to Bridget, along
					with a letter saying that she can’t yet talk about what happened
					and that she hopes the Pants bring Bridget “good sense.”

“Life is so . . . whatever.”

Bridget thinks about having sex with Eric. She and her
					friends are virgins, but she feels differently about Eric. She tells
					her friends she’s sure she and Eric are going to hook up that night.
					Bridget plays in a soccer match, keeping herself from dominating
					the game.

Carmen shows up in Tibby’s bedroom. Sobbing, she tells
					Tibby how unhappy she was in South Carolina and that she broke the kitchen
					window. Tibby doesn’t really understand why Carmen hates everyone
					so much. Carmen thinks Tibby looks exhausted. She tells Tibby more
					about what she feels, but she gets angry when Tibby suggests she’s
					mad at Albert. Tibby then suggests that Carmen put her problems
					in perspective, and Carmen storms out.

Tibby writes to Lena about how her documentary is, surprisingly,
					not funny.

Bridget’s team, Los Tacos, plays another match, but Molly
					makes Bridget play defense. But, in the last part of the game, Bridget
					scores a spectacular goal.

The domestic family scene Carmen sees through Lydia’s
					window is vastly different from the kind of family life she knows,
					and her violent reaction is rooted in both anger and jealousy. Carmen
					is angry, because her father doesn’t seem to care enough about her
					to notice that she’s missing. When she stormed out of the house,
					she expected him to look for her, assuming that his concern would
					trump her petulance and rudeness. Instead, he’s gone about his day,
					and worry over Carmen doesn’t seem to have stopped him from enjoying
					his dinner. But Carmen is also jealous, since her father is happy
					now in a way he never was with Carmen and her mother. At home in Bethesda,
					Carmen and her mother have lived for years as a happy twosome, and
					Carmen has not lacked for love. However, seeing her father’s new
					family—with two parents—makes her realize how much she’s missed
					having a father. Rather than play that role for her, her father
					has chosen to be father to a new set of children.

Carmen and Tibby are the first friends to reunite after
					time apart, and their awkward encounter suggests that the girls
					have changed in ways the others won’t easily understand. Carmen
					thinks she can count on Tibby for quick sarcasm and easy anger on
					her behalf. However, Tibby now has a different perspective on life.
					She sees the bigger picture, and she knows that some things aren’t
					worth getting upset about. As she’s gotten to know Bailey and met
					people for her documentary, she’s realized that she and her friends
					have a lot to be thankful for. They are healthy, and they have many
					people in their lives to stop them from being lonely. Whereas Tibby
					would once have taken Carmen’s side no matter what, she now finds
					it hard to accept Carmen’s childish jealousy and her reluctance
					to admit she’s angry with her father. For her part, Carmen can’t
					accept that Tibby is judging her. She believes the role of Tibby
					is simply to listen, understand, and tell Carmen she’s right. Although
					Tibby is the one who’s stayed home this summer, she’s also the one
					who has become more mature and worldly. Carmen doesn’t know how
					to handle the new Tibby, and she leaves in anger.

