Reason is the first of the three allegorical figures to step forward and
				announce her intention to dispel the insecurity and ignorance that clouds
				Christine’s intellect. She is also the first to announce the figures’ intention
				to appear to Christine and present her with her task of constructing the City of
				Ladies. Reason presents herself as an administrator who will oversee the
				construction of a flawless city. Reason helps Christine perform the initial
				excavation work. She encourages Christine to reassess the power of her pen as a
				device that can be used to unearth the truth and to remove the mud and dirt that
				previously sullied the good name of women. Only then can a solid foundation be
				established. As a symbolic presence, Reason is an important first figure to
				appear to Christine, as all philosophical arguments must originate and proceed
				with logic. Without logic, any ensuing evidence or conclusions would lack solid
				framework and would crumble.

In her oration and her response to Christine’s various questions
				concerning the nature of women, Reason establishes several important patterns.
				She uses Christine’s questions as prompts to help her develop thematic elements
				that are also qualities shared by all virtuous and notable women. From these
				initial suggestions, Reason, and subsequently the two other Virtues, provide a
				series of narrations as a growing body of evidence supporting the defense of
				women. Story by story, the argument gains strength, just as brick by brick the
				city grows larger and more forbidding. Reason cites examples from a variety of
				sources. She tells of women from the past as well as the present. By doing so,
				she draws parallels between past and present, suggesting a continuous and
				ongoing history of virtue on the part of women. In establishing this second
				pattern, Reason wishes to dispel any notion that venerable women were solely a
				thing of the past.

