The memoir’s protagonist. Ishmael is ten years old at the beginning of the memoir, interested in rap music and dancing until the civil war in Sierra Leone robs him of his family and childhood. As a child soldier, Ishmael earns the nickname “Green Snake” because of his ability to be sneaky and deadly in battle.

Read an in-depth analysis of Ishmael Beah.

Ishmael’s older brother. Junior is also a child during the war, although he escapes the fate of becoming a child soldier. Ishmael looks up to Junior and finds comfort in his presence before they are separated.

Read an in-depth analysis of Junior.

Ishmael’s mother, who is separated from his father but still sees Ishmael regularly. She speaks kindly of Ishmael’s father and wishes she could send Ishmael and his brother to school.

Read an in-depth analysis of Ishmael's mother.

Ishmael’s father, who works for an American company in Sierra Leone. Although Ishmael is somewhat estranged from his father because he doesn’t get along with his stepmother, memories of his father do help Ishmael get through tough times during the war.

Read an in-depth analysis of Ishmael's father.

A nurse from the rehabilitation center who befriends Ishmael and plays a large part in his repatriation. Esther is dedicated to the cause of rehabilitating child soldiers.

Read an in-depth analysis of Esther.

Ishmael’s uncle, a carpenter. Uncle Tommy takes Ishmael in along with several other cousins. He becomes sick and dies after fighting begins again in Freetown.

Read an in-depth analysis of Uncle Tommy.

A storyteller who lives in New York City. Simms eventually adopts Ishmael after meeting him when he goes to speak in front of the United Nations.

A friend of Ishmael’s from Centennial Secondary School in Mattru Jong. Alhaji is the tallest of the boys and he uses elaborate gestures when speaking. He earns the name “Little Rambo” as a child soldier, but he is rehabilitated at Benin Home with Ishmael.

A friend of Ishmael’s from Centennial Secondary School in Mattru Jong. Musa is short and bulky and known for telling folk tales. He loses his parents when Mattru Jong is attacked and is later killed in his first battle as a child soldier.

A boy soldier Ishmael meets and befriends at the rehabilitation center. Mambu is as fierce a soldier as Ishmael. Although Mambu is rehabilitated with Ishmael, he eventually goes back to the front lines of the war because his family refuses to take him in.

Ishmael’s maternal grandmother. Memories of her bring Ishmael some comfort during the war. 

A kamor (teacher), Arabic scholar, and healer. Ishmael’s grandfather teaches him the skills that help him survive in the forest on his own.

One of the children being raised by Ishmael’s uncle. Allie has good manners and is well-spoken. Allie shares his room with Ishmael when he moves into his uncle’s house.

A field-worker for Children Associated with the War (CAW) who helps find Ishmael’s uncle after the war. He ensures that Ishmael can be repatriated.

The director of Benin Home, a rehabilitation center for child soldiers. Mr. Kamara recognizes something great in Ishmael and recommends him to speak at the United Nations.

A lieutenant who recruits Ishmael and his friends to be soldiers. He likes to discuss Shakespeare.

