An earnest spiritual pilgrim, Siddhartha is totally consumed
				by his quest for spiritual enlightenment. Though in his youth he
				learns the wisdom of his Brahmin heritage and masters the skills
				of the Samanas and the teachings of Gotama, the spiritual explanations that
				satisfy those around him are inadequate for Siddhartha because they
				do not lead to enlightenment. No matter how many others accept a
				particular religious explanation, Siddhartha will refuse the explanation
				if it rings false. Siddhartha seeks spiritual enlightenment at any
				cost, even when the search complicates other areas of life. Friends,
				lovers, and family members fall by the wayside when Siddhartha believes
				they are not compatible with his quest. Further, he believes no
				leader or philosophy is beyond questioning. Guided by a strong belief
				in his convictions, he argues with the head of the Samanas and even
				with the enlightened Gotama the Buddha himself. Siddhartha does
				not argue for argument’s sake, nor does he question wisdom out of
				a sense of pride or superiority. He finds logical flaws in the teachings
				put before him, and he seeks the truth.

	Siddhartha possesses an incredible degree of patience,
				which proves to be important since his quest takes a lifetime to
				fulfill. He progresses through successive spiritual explorations,
				experiences failure numerous times, but persists until he reaches
				his goal. The instantaneous, magical transmission of Nirvana from
				Siddhartha to Govinda demonstrates that Siddhartha has found the
				transcendent understanding they have both sought for so long. He
				has finally reached his goal. 

Siddhartha is the Sanskrit name of the Buddha and means
				“he who is on the proper road” or “he who achieves his goal.” Hesse
				is not attempting to directly portray the life of the Buddha himself through
				Siddhartha but to use Siddhartha as a means of discussing a path
				to enlightenment. At the same time, many striking similarities exist
				between Siddhartha and the actual Buddha. For example, both left
				promising lives in their pursuit of knowledge. In Siddhartha’s case,
				he leaves Kamala when he becomes disillusioned with the material
				world, while the Buddha left a wife and son to become an ascetic.
				Both studied with ascetics, and both spent many years in study by
				a river, finally achieving enlightenment. Siddhartha has succeeded
				in his own arduous quest, and at the end of the novel, he is poised
				to take on followers of his own.

