Anne tells her diary that she has been seeing more of
					Hello. Hello’s parents are in Belgium, but there is no way for him
					to travel there, so he is living in Amsterdam with his grandparents.
					On Sunday afternoon, Hello tells Anne that his grandmother did not
					approve of his association with such a young girl. He also says
					that he prefers Anne to his old girlfriend Ursul. Hello tells Anne
					that he will be free Wednesday evenings as well as parts of Saturdays
					and Sundays, since he used to go to meetings for a Zionist organization
					but decided not to attend them anymore. On Monday, he meets Anne’s parents,
					then he and Anne go for a walk and do not return until after eight
					in the evening. Anne’s father is furious, and she promises to return
					before eight in the future. Anne confesses that she is really in love
					with a boy named Peter, even though he is dating other girls, and
					that Hello is just a friend or a beau.

	Anne receives decent grades on her report card but adds
					that her parents do not care about grades as much as some of her
					friends’ parents do. Anne’s father explains that they will likely
					have to go into hiding soon, which is why they have been asking
					friends to store their belongings. He tells her that they will “leave
					of [their] own accord” instead of waiting for the Germans to take
					them and that Anne does not have to worry about it right away. She
					is greatly dismayed by her father’s plans. Three days later, on
					Sunday afternoon, Anne’s sister, Margot, tells her that their father
					had received a call-up notice from the SS, the elite Nazi guard.
					Later, alone in their room, Margot tells Anne that it was really
					herself, not Mr. Frank, who had been called up. The girls quickly
					start packing their things. The next day, they pile on as many layers
					of clothes as they can, since they cannot risk carrying suitcases.
					Margot leaves the house first, carrying a schoolbag full of books,
					and Anne follows later that evening.

	Eventually, the entire family arrives at their hiding
					place in Otto Frank’s office building at 263 Prinsengracht.
					A secret annex was hidden upstairs from the office, behind a big
					gray door. Four people who work in the office are informed of the
					Franks’ arrival. Margot is waiting for the rest of the family in
					the annex, which is stocked with dozens of cardboard boxes that
					had been sent over time. Anne and her father start unpacking the
					boxes as her mother and sister sleep. Anne writes that she did not
					have time until Wednesday to consider the “enormous change in [her]
					life,” and that she finally had time to tell her diary about it
					and think about “what had happened to [her] and what was yet to
					happen.”

This section illustrates the poignant contrast between
					Anne’s innocence and the gravity of her family’s situation. Having
					lived a fairly sheltered life thus far in Amsterdam, Anne is naturally
					focused on normal concerns such as grades and her relationships
					with boys. Anne writes in detail about her experiences with Hello,
					which appear to be the most important aspect of her life. Like a
					typical teenager, Anne focuses on the little nuances of her relationships, experiencing
					emotional ups and downs based on the type of attention she receives
					from boys and her friends. However, the events that force the Franks
					into hiding trivialize every subject that Anne has written about
					so far. The new gravity of her situation forces Anne to grow up
					quickly and understand issues that are much bigger than her small
					social world.

	Anne’s writing style changes with the transition to her
					new life in the annex. When the family is forced into hiding, Anne’s
					writing becomes more terse. As the family makes preparations to
					leave their home, Anne writes, “After that it was quiet in our apartment;
					none of us felt like eating. It was still hot, and everything was
					very strange.” Anne seems to find comfort in making such concise
					observations. She makes sure to document each moment of the frightening
					night when the Franks realize they must hide. When her family is feeling
					tense and fearful, Anne turns to her diary for comfort so that she
					does not have to depend on the already worried adults. This shows
					Anne’s considerable independence for her young age. She knows that
					a serious upheaval is occurring in her family’s life, but she does
					not panic or cry to her drained parents. Anne instead relies on
					her journal to support her and drowns out her fears with numerous
					peripheral details, such as the intricate layout of the annex and the
					family’s moment-by-moment actions. She likewise seems to take comfort
					in busying herself with practical tasks, as she and Mr. Frank unpack
					the family’s boxes while the others sleep.

	Anne has always been aware of prejudice against Jews
					and of the dangers created by the war. At the same time, she has
					not felt a sense of immediate danger, so her concerns are focused
					on mundane issues of daily life. When her family is forced to hide,
					Anne is confronted with a new reality and finds that she must reconsider
					the world and her relationship with it. She is particularly horrified
					that it is Margot, not Mr. Frank, who is called up by the SS. She
					realizes that the Nazi police do not give any special treatment
					to children or adults and that all Jews are equally at risk. Anne
					begins to learn that she can no longer live in the innocent social
					world of a young teenager and must suddenly confront the adult world
					and the harshness and dangers of the war.

