At the beginning of her memoir, Catalina is a young woman living in a
				convent, on the verge of taking her vows to become a nun. She eventually
				transforms herself into a soldier with a male persona, adept at killing both on
				and off the battlefield. In positioning herself as a man, she exhibits many
				stereotypically male traits, including bravado, competitiveness, and
				aggressiveness. She possesses a quick temper and responds to insults with her
				sword. She writes very little about her feelings—her memoir is almost entirely
				devoid of introspection. She appears to have no compunction about killing men
				for reasons as trivial as offending her over a game of cards. Despite the fact
				that she generally depends on violence to solve problems in her day-to-day life,
				she is very intelligent, and many times she survives by using only her wits. She
				moves from place to place regularly, never settling down or developing close
				relationships with others, perhaps for fear that they will discover her greatest
				secret—that she is a woman.

Although Lieutenant Nun covers more than twenty-six
				years, Catalina shows very little personal or emotional growth. The Catalina at
				the end of the memoir is nearly identical to the Catalina from the beginning;
				the passage of time is apparent only when Catalina writes that it has. Her
				development is primarily in terms of the violence she commits. She becomes a
				better soldier over the years, and she also becomes more readily able to kill at
				the smallest provocation. Despite her abilities as a soldier, or perhaps because
				of them, she rarely expresses emotion. One of the few times she describes how
				she feels is when she expresses joy about meeting her brother. Another is when
				she is plunged into despair after killing him. Catalina’s life, and her secret
				identity as a woman, doesn’t allow for many intimate relationships. Her
				relationship with her brother is the most important relationship in her life,
				but she devotes only a few words to it. Catalina clearly values her skill and
				prowess as a soldier and as a man far more than she does her emotional
				development, which she likely associates with her biologically designated
				gender—one she has worked so hard to hide.

