It’s coming, my brother. . . . Though
					you murder the world, transmogrify life into I and it, strong searching roots
					will crack your cave and rain will cleanse it: The world will burn
					green, sperm build again.

That night, filled with excitement, lust, joy, and fear,
					Grendel raids the meadhall. He bursts through the heavy front door
					to discover all the men asleep. Madly prankish, he ties a tablecloth
					around his neck like a napkin and proceeds to eat one sleeping man.
					Grendel grabs another man by the wrist, only to discover that it
					is Beowulf, who has been silently watching him in order to see how
					he operates. With a stare as intense as his grip, Beowulf twists
					Grendel’s arm around in the socket, causing him pain unlike any
					he has ever felt. Grendel has a surreal, fantastic vision of the
					meadhall coming to life, and he sees a pair of wings sprouting from
					Beowulf’s back. Reminding himself that Beowulf is only a man, Grendel
					tries to regain his senses and plan a logical attack. But just then
					Grendel slips on a puddle of blood, and the accident allows Beowulf
					to take the upper hand.

Beowulf starts whispering madly in Grendel’s ear. Though
					Grendel tries to avoid listening, he is helpless. Beowulf begins
					by quoting the dragon’s description of the world as a meaningless
					swirl of dust. Laughing and spitting flames, Beowulf speaks of an
					approaching period of regeneration in the world. Grendel refuses
					to be taken in by Beowulf’s words, which remind him of all the talk
					he has already heard. Slipping in and out of his visions, Grendel
					whimpers and bawls for his mother. He claims that Beowulf has gained
					the upper hand merely by taking advantage of an accident: if Grendel
					had not slipped on the blood, he would be winning. Beowulf hurls
					Grendel against a table and then a wall, demanding that Grendel
					observe the hardness of the wall. He continues to smash Grendel
					against the walls, breaking his forehead open. Then Beowulf demands
					that Grendel “sing of walls.” After some resistance, Grendel sings
					a short verse about man’s walls crumbling with the passage of time, leaving
					nothing but the shining memory of the town.

Grendel continues to insist that Beowulf is insane, and
					that his victory is only an accident and no proof of the truth of
					his words. Grendel is amazed when Beowulf manages to rip his arm
					off at the shoulder. Suddenly realizing that he will die, Grendel
					stumbles out of the hall and into the darkness of the night. The
					outlines of everything around him appear remarkably distinct. Grendel
					calls for his mother one last time. He finds himself standing at
					the edge of the same cliff where he stood in Chapter 1,
					staring down into its bottomless depths. Something inside Grendel
					moves him to tumble down into the abyss voluntarily. His sight clears
					for a moment, and no longer in pain, he notices that his old enemies,
					the animals, have gathered around him to watch him die. Overcome
					by both terror and joy, Grendel whispers to them, “Poor Grendel’s
					had an accident. . . . So may you all.”

In the midst of the climactic battle, Grendel has a hallucination
					of Beowulf sprouting wings and spitting flames like a dragon. Indeed, Grendel’s
					encounter with Beowulf in many ways parallels his earlier encounter
					with the dragon. Grendel senses the dragon several chapters before
					he actually meets him or even apprehends his nature. Similarly,
					Grendel feels Beowulf’s imminent presence long before the warrior
					actually arrives in Denmark. Furthermore, just as it is unclear
					whether the dragon is a separate, distinct creature or a creation
					of Grendel’s own mind, Beowulf’s appearance shifts and mutates drastically
					throughout his battle with Grendel, leaving us to wonder if these
					changes are actually occurring or are merely a function of Grendel’s
					imagination and perception. As there is no logical reason why Beowulf
					would have such uncanny insight into Grendel’s thoughts and psychology,
					there is a sense that this vision of a dragon-like Beowulf is a
					private revelation intended only for Grendel.

Beowulf and the dragon are the only characters who speak directly
					to Grendel and pierce through his isolation, and their messages
					are closely related, though essentially opposed. Beowulf begins
					his lecture to Grendel by quoting the dragon, describing the present
					moment as a “temporary gathering of bits, a few random specks, a
					cloud.” Beowulf accepts the dragon’s explanation of the world as
					a place where everything eventually dies. However, while the dragon
					emphasizes death and decay, Beowulf looks beyond the moment of death
					and emphasizes the rebirth that always follows. Beowulf’s promise
					of a burning, avenging spring season echoes the song sung at the
					Shaper’s funeral, which also describes a violent seasonal shift
					that paradoxically holds the promise of both life and death. Gardner
					claimed that he based the dragon imagery in Grendel on
					a medieval tradition in which both Christ and the devil were portrayed
					as dragons. Beowulf, in his association with the dead and risen
					Christ, also represents the coexistence of life and death in one figure.

This notion of paradox resurfaces in the final moments
					of the novel, when the one-armed Grendel stands at the edge of the
					cliff and cannot discern whether it is joy or terror he feels. Grendel’s death
					is clearly gruesome and violent, and we may find his plight pathetic
					and heart-wrenching. His final words appear to be a curse directed
					at the mindless, stupid animals that have gathered to watch him
					die. However, some critics have also interpreted Grendel’s final words
					as a strange sort of blessing. Although in intense pain, Grendel
					is now free from the mindless, mechanical cycle in which he earlier
					found himself trapped. Importantly, the impetus for Grendel’s sudden
					freedom from this cycle is a mere accident, his slipping on a pool
					of blood during the battle with Beowulf. As this twist implies that
					machines have no place for the accidental or unexpected, perhaps
					Grendel is wishing an “accident” on the animals as a means of freeing
					them from their blindly predetermined paths.

The idea of the accident as an agent of salvation recalls
					the exchange between Ork and the fourth priest after Ork’s conversation
					with Grendel. The fourth priest worries that Ork’s tendency to think
					in neat, closed systems of rational thought is crippling Ork. Allowing
					himself to stumble into a rapturous vision of the Destroyer, however,
					opens Ork up to fantastic, absurd, illogical possibilities. To the
					fourth priest, these illogical possibilities are the stuff of life.
					Like blood and sperm—two fluids that hold the essence of life itself—truth
					is messy, explosive, and unplanned. In other words, the fourth priest
					believes that truth is found in the accidental. Beowulf alludes
					to the fourth priest’s outburst when he describes how spring will
					burst through the dead structures of winter and “the world will
					burn green, sperm build again.” Grendel, for his part, understands
					the distinction between “chilly intellect” and “hot imagination,”
					but he refuses to admit that Beowulf might be right until the very
					end, when he himself concedes to feelings of ambivalence. Significantly, Grendel ends
					before we actually see Grendel take the plunge into the abyss. Instead,
					Grendel remains poised on the edge of the cliff—an image forever
					unresolved.

