Esther Summerson, the narrator and protagonist of Bleak
					House, is relentlessly modest and frequently disparages
				her own intelligence, but she proves to be a confident narrator
				who never misses the opportunity to relate others’ compliments of
				her. When we first meet Esther, she is a hesitant narrator who feels
				she won’t be able to properly relay the story because she isn’t
				“clever.” However, far from proceeding meekly, she launches into
				detailed storytelling, setting scenes and describing characters
				easily. She generally refrains from editorializing about her own
				behavior, but when she does something good—such as when she successfully
				cares for the Jellyby children before she even reaches Bleak House—she
				includes others’ praise of her in her narration. As her narrative
				gains breadth and depth, her confidence as a narrator grows. She
				deliberately withholds information or delays including it to give
				her story coherence and dramatic effect, often commenting on her
				storytelling by telling us that something isn’t important or that
				she’ll tell us more about it later on. And even though she is for
				the most part a reliable narrator (a narrator we can trust to accurately
				tell the story), she is less reliable when relaying information
				about her romantic life. For example, she hints at her feelings
				for Mr. Woodcourt, but she never addresses them until much later
				in the novel.

Esther nurtures everyone around her, and her first instinct
				is to be motherly, perhaps because she has never had a caring mother
				figure of her own. Mr. Jarndyce takes her in to be a companion to
				Ada, but Esther cares for Mr. Jarndyce and Richard just as much
				as she does for Ada. Many others, including young Caddy and Peepy
				Jellby, Charley, and Jo also receive Esther’s devotion. Ironically,
				Esther, for all her caring and tenderness, is the unwitting cause
				of great unhappiness. Because of Esther’s illegitimate birth, Lady
				Dedlock was forever estranged from her sister, Miss Barbary, and
				was forced to carry a painful secret. Because Miss Barbary chose
				to raise Esther secretly, she was forced to separate from Mr. Boythorn,
				who never recovered from his broken heart. Because other unhappinesses,
				such as Sir Leicester’s tragic fate, radiate from these secrets,
				we could argue that Esther is indirectly responsible for these as
				well. Although no one could possibly say that these difficulties
				are Esther’s fault, her indirect connection to them gives her relentless
				nurturing greater depth: in a way, she nurtures as penance for others’
				sins.

