A Christmas Carol by Charles Dickens, published in 1843, is a timeless novella that has become a classic of the Christmas season. While it reflects how many people think about Christmas, it is also a key source for popular Christmas traditions. The story follows Ebenezer Scrooge, a miserly and cold-hearted old man, as he undergoes a transformative journey on Christmas Eve. Scrooge is visited by the ghost of his former business partner, and three spirits. Through these spectral encounters, he is forced to confront the consequences of his past choices and the potential outcomes of his current path through life.

Set in the dreary streets of Victorian London, A Christmas Carol not only captures the spirit of Christmas but also serves as a social commentary on the plight of the poor and the importance of compassion and generosity. Dickens addresses issues of social injustice and inequality, urging readers to consider the well-being of others during the holiday season and beyond.

One aspect of the novella’s enduring popularity lies in its message of redemption, the joy of giving, and the possibility of change. However, much of its appeal comes from the fact that the novella and its trappings have come to represent how many people feel about Christmas and its observation. The celebration of Christmas changed drastically during the 19th century, with A Christmas Carol playing a key role in defining how people came to think about and observe Christmas.

Given its strong relevance at Christmastime, it is not surprising that the novella has been adapted into numerous plays, films, and television specials—the viewing of which have become a holiday tradition for many. Of the many straightforward adaptations of A Christmas Carol, the 1951 version starring Alistair Sim is probably the best, but the novella has also inspired many clever takes on the Dickens classic. These include Scrooged from 1988, in which Bill Murray plays a ruthless television executive who is visited by lesson-bearing spirits on Christmas Eve and Brian Hensen’s 1992 film, The Muppet Christmas Carol, starring Michael Caine (the only non-Muppet cast member) as Scrooge in an adaptation that expertly captures the magic and message of the beloved novella.

Read a full plot summary, an in-depth analysis of Ebenezer Scrooge, and the Key Questions & Answers about A Christmas Carol.

