The protagonist and narrator of the autobiography. Malala lives in Pakistan and has a thorough knowledge of her rich heritage. Although she is brought up to believe that she is free, Malala struggles with the fact that her options are limited as a Pakistani woman. She experiences conflict throughout her childhood and young adulthood that motivates her to fight for Pakistani girls to be educated and make their own choices. While her friends’ families become intimidated by the Taliban, Malala remains defiant and continues to work on the girls’ behalf.

Read an in-depth analysis of Malala Yousafzai.

Malala’s father and the founder of Khushal School in Pakistan. Having a baby girl is typically a cause for sorrow in the Pashtun culture. Ziauddin, however, proudly adds “Malala” to the family tree. Ziauddin values education above all else from the time he is a boy and passes this quality on to his daughter. Ziauddin founds a girls’ school in Mingora, a large city in Pakistan, and keeps it open despite repeated threats from the Taliban. Ziauddin’s example is a huge influence on Malala.

Read an in-depth analysis of Ziauddin Yousafzai.

Malala’s mother and female role model. Toor Pekai is known in her village for her hospitality and generosity, which are characteristic of the Pashtun culture. She feeds village children and offers shelter to friends and strangers alike when they are in need. While she is not formally educated, Toor Pekai encourages her daughter’s ambitions and recognizes that she is unlike other girls. Still, as Malala begins to garner more attention within Swat Valley and surrounding areas, Toor Pekai worries for her safety.

Read an in-depth analysis of Toor Pekai Yousafzai.

A militant Taliban leader in the Swat Valley. Fazlullah launches a local radio station when Malala is ten years old. At first, his show seems harmless. Even Toor Pekai appreciates the way Fazlullah encourages prayer. Soon it becomes clear that he is dangerous. He has come to the valley to encourage people to turn to strict sharia law. He eventually declares all-out war on the Pakistani government and shuts down all schools for girls in early 2008.

Read an in-depth analysis of Malauna Fazlullah.

A Pakistani politician and former Chief General in the Pakistani army. When he becomes president in 1999, Musharraf promises to end corruption in the government. Musharraf does not keep this promise. It is also discovered that he enriches himself with American money while still helping jihadis. Although Musharraf makes a push to westernize Pakistan by allowing dancing on television and opening up more jobs to women, these changes do not make their way to Swat Valley.

A BBC radio correspondent. Kakar is looking for a female teacher or student to tell the story of living in Pakistan under the Taliban. Malala volunteers after another girl backs out. Kakar advises Malala to use a pseudonym to protect her safety and tells her the story of Anne Frank. Kakar’s coverage of Malala’s diary brings attention to the young girls trying to receive an education under a militant regime. Kakar also convinces Fazlullah to reopen girls’ schools at the primary level after Fazlullah orders them all to be closed.

A chief in the Pakistani Army. After Malala is shot, Kayani helps get her transferred to a military hospital. When her parents become overwhelmed, Kayani takes over making medical decisions for Malala as her parents are overwhelmed. He primarily weighs the political optics of the situation as he decides how and when Malala should be moved to another country.

Friend of Ziauddin and a member of Swat Jirga, or tribal assembly. Khan and Malala’s father speak out against militants so often that they joke about which one of them will get shot first. Khan is threatened several times before the Taliban shoots and almost kills him in 2012.

Friend of Ziauddin and co-founder of Khushal School. Although they have their disagreements while opening the school, Hidayatullah is a loyal friend who advises Ziauddin during difficult times. Hidayatullah is a voice of reason and wishes that his friend would take more precautions once he clearly becomes a target of the Taliban.

The first female Prime Minister of Pakistan. Bhutto is Malala’s personal hero. As Prime Minister, she promises to fight extremism in her country. She is assassinated in December of 2007 when Malala is only ten years old. Bhutto’s death is a turning point for Malala, motivating her to want to become a politician and fight for girls’ education.

A New York Times reporter. Ellick follows Malala and Ziauddin to document their last day of school in January of 2009 when Fazlullah says all girls’ schools will close. He later brings the whole Yousafzai family to Islamabad, where they visit museums and important cultural sites. He introduces Malala to Ugly Betty, an American television show that helps Malala understand what is possible for women in other countries.

A friend of the Yousafzai family. Shahid offers her home while the family is displaced. Later, she brings Malala and over twenty of her classmates to Islamabad so they can recover from the trauma of living under the Taliban. There, Shahid introduces the girls to female lawyers and activists. Malala stops wearing her shawl over her head at some of the meetings the girls attend with Shahid.

Malala’s paternal grandfather and imam. Amin is unhappy about Ziauddin’s career path of teaching and is not helpful when his son is starting out. This, in turn, makes Ziauddin stronger and more self-reliant. Although Amin is unhappy when he learns he has a granddaughter instead of a grandson, he quickly grows to love Malala.

British doctors. The doctors happen to be in Pakistan when Malala is shot. They visit her and later follow her case when she is moved to Birmingham.

Malala’s teacher and “second mother”. Madame Maryam encourages and praises Malala, helping the young girl realize she’s worthy of more than what her culture teaches she can be.

Malala’s school friend. While they often quarrel, Moniba is Malala’s best friend and is by her side in her fight for education. Moniba is well-spoken and is one of the small group of girls who continue attending school during Taliban rule.

Malala’s school friend. Malka e-Noor presents fierce academic competition for Malala. When Malka surpasses Malala during one of the first testing periods after joining Khushal School, Malala vows it will never happen again. In spite of their competition, the girls become good friends.

Malala’s younger brothers. Khushal and Atal offer a rare look at Malala as a little girl. Malala generally describes her brothers as annoying and bothersome.

The founder of Pakistan. Until 1947, Pakistan was part of India. Jinnah establishes the new country and gives a famous speech asking for peace. He dies the following year. Malala visits his tomb in Karachi.

A Muslim chaplain. Rehanna is at the hospital when Malala wakes up in Birmingham, England. She prays with Malala, bringing her peace and comfort while she waits for her family to arrive.

A bus driver in Mingora. Bhai Jan is driving the school bus when Malala is shot.

