Although Naomi is the novel’s narrator, her character
				is something of a mystery. Indeed, opacity is a key part of her
				personality. An earnest and quiet, almost silent, child, she turns
				into a self-contained, unknowable adult. As a girl, she suffers
				various serious traumas, most notably displacement, internment,
				and sexual molestation. To live a functional adult life, she shuts
				herself off from her past and her emotions. In the first chapters
				of the novel, Naomi tells us next to nothing about herself or her
				life. We lack basic information about her, an intentional gap Kogawa
				uses to suggest Naomi lacks basic information about herself.

As the novel progresses, Naomi rediscovers that information.
				We learn a great deal about the questions that preoccupy her. We
				know she thinks about what happened to her mother, and whether it’s
				better to leave the past alone or to investigate. We also know she
				ponders to what extent classic Japanese character attributes oppress young
				women. Yet by the end of the novel, we don’t know much more about
				Naomi—her likes and dislikes, her quirks and foibles—than we did
				at the beginning. This persistent opacity points to the lasting
				effect of childhood crises.

We do know that Naomi is a survivor. Her life is a catalogue
				of miseries: Her next door neighbor abuses and possibly rapes her;
				her mother disappears without explanation; her family is forced
				to move, and move again; her father dies; she must work her fingers
				to the bone on a beet farm and live in a chicken coop; her older
				brother moves away and all but renounces the family; and she endures
				the casual racism of her students and neighbors. Despite this litany
				of disasters, Naomi is uncomplaining. She shows flashes of bitterness here
				and there and feels passionate anger about the most horrifying of
				the many injustices heaped on her family. However, she endures the
				outrages in silent stoicism while they happen, looking back on them
				with careful interest once they are in the past. Refusing to play the
				role of victim, she is amazingly wry, observant, and lyrical.

