In November, Sir Ector receives a letter from Uther Pendragon,
					the king of England, telling him that the royal huntsman, William Twyti,
					will be coming to hunt near Sir Ector’s castle that winter. Sir Ector
					is expected to house Twyti, his dogs, and his men.

On Christmas night, the whole village comes to the great
					hall of the castle to feast. William Twyti is there with his men.
					The castle and its fields are beautiful under the snow, and everyone
					is in a good mood.

Early the next morning, Twyti gathers his men
					and his dogs for the hunt. With the help of Robin Wood, they find
					a boar. The boar eventually rushes at Twyti, but Robin kills it
					with a sword before it can harm Twyti. After the hunt, Pellinore
					finds the Questing Beast lying sick on the ground and deduces that
					the beast’s decline is his fault. Pellinore is guilt-ridden by the
					thought that he has been resting in Sir Grummore’s castle for months
					while the beast has pined away in his absence. He gathers men to
					bring the Questing Beast back to Sir Ector’s castle, where he plans
					to nurse it back to health so the quest can begin again.

One day in spring, Merlyn, the Wart, and Merlyn’s talking
					owl, Archimedes, have a conversation. The Wart claims that the rook
					is his favorite bird because it flies as though it has a sense of
					humor. Archimedes says his favorite bird is the pigeon. Merlyn speculates that
					the calls of birds and animals are imitations of sounds in nature.

That night, Merlyn transforms the Wart into an owl. Archimedes teaches
					him to fly gracefully. Once the Wart knows how to fly, Merlyn turns
					him into a goose and transports him to a vast, wet plain. The Wart
					flies with other geese, looks for food, stands guard as they eat,
					and meets a female goose named Lyo-lyok. She makes fun of his strange
					behavior, and the Wart tells her that he is really a human. He shocks
					her by wondering out loud whether they are guarding against an attack
					by other geese. Lyo-lyok tells him that the idea of two
					groups of the same species killing each other is unthinkable, since there
					are already predators outside of their species and since there are no
					boundaries or territories in the air that can be fought over.

The Wart learns about the geese’s society from Lyo-lyok.
					The geese have no private property or laws, and their leaders are
					selected on the basis of their ability to navigate. Soon the time
					for migration comes, and on their first day of flight, they travel
					to Norway. The Wart wakes up in his human form to hear Kay, with
					whom the Wart shares a bed, telling him he snores like a goose.

King Pellinore’s discovery of the sick Questing Beast
					in this section satirizes the futility of the knightly quest and
					makes such quests seem endearing. Hunting the Questing Beast is
					not only Pellinore’s mission in life, but also the mission of his
					entire family. His discovery of the sick beast, however, demonstrates
					that he does not really desire to accomplish this goal. Rather than
					kill the beast and bring the Pellinore dynasty to its final triumph,
					Pellinore nurses the beast back to health so the chase can continue.
					In doing so, Pellinore seems to be a somewhat ridiculous figure,
					more interested in the sense of purpose that the quest brings to
					his life than in actually accomplishing this purpose. It is hard,
					however, to fault him for his tenderness toward the creature. As
					silly as it is for him to keep on hunting when he could finally
					end his mission, it would be heartless for him to slay the ailing,
					heartbroken beast. It is interesting too that the bumbling Pellinore,
					usually so shy and maladjusted, seizes control of the situation
					here and becomes an assertive, almost admirable figure. This episode
					suggests that Pellinore’s quest is foolish but that he is somehow
					noble in pursuing it.

The boar hunt is significant because the narrative returns
					to Kay’s quest, during which the novel’s morals and philosophy are
					set aside in favor of a more traditional adventure tale. The boar
					hunt is an opportunity for White to portray genuine medieval life
					and has none of the fantastic elements that populate the rest of
					the story. The animals do not talk, there are no fairies, and neither
					griffins nor crows threaten Kay or the Wart. This hunt is described
					in realistic terms and inspires strong emotions. Twyti cries over
					the death of one of his hunting dogs, and his sadness is believable.
					This death has more emotional impact than the violence during the
					Wart’s fantastic and surreal adventures. Much like White himself,
					Twyti lives for his dogs, whose company he clearly values above
					that of humans; the death of his beloved hound is as heart-wrenching
					for him as the death of any of his hunters. By taking us outside
					of the novel’s fantasy world, the boar hunt reminds us that there
					is life outside of Sir Ector’s lands and that the land is ruled
					by a real king.

The Wart’s adventure with the geese presents him with
					a model of society that is nearly the opposite of the one he experiences
					during his visit to the ant colony. Like the ants, the geese are
					communal, since they share all property and work, but they elect
					their leaders, and their communal life does not threaten individual
					expression. When the Wart mentions the idea of a war among geese,
					the idea is so foreign to them that it takes a while for Lyo-lyok
					even to understand what he means. Whereas we can interpret the ant
					colony as White’s attack on the repression of communist societies,
					the geese espouse a sort of democratic socialism, in which a group
					of individuals all act in one another’s best interests. The novel
					does not draw any explicit conclusions from these examples but simply
					presents how they function and what results. Like the Wart, we are
					expected to draw our own conclusions about which society seems the
					best and most practical.

