Paralyzed under the Invisibility Cloak, Harry is powerless.
					Suddenly, his cloak flies off and Tonks appears, helping him up. Together,
					they hurry toward Hogwarts. As Harry enters the Great Hall, students
					turn and stare. Dumbledore introduces Professor Slughorn as the
					new Professor of Potions and explains that Snape will now be teaching
					Defense Against the Dark Arts. Harry, Ron, and Hermione are shocked.
					Dumbledore has never before trusted Snape with such an important
					position. Ron points out that the job is jinxed, as no one has ever
					lasted more than a year as a Defense Against the Dark Arts instructor.
					As they leave the Great Hall and return to their dormitories, Harry
					tells Ron what he overheard in the Slytherin compartment. Ron remains
					skeptical about Draco’s relationship to Voldemort. They run into
					Hagrid, who tells the boys he’ll see them at Care of Magical Creatures
					the next morning. Neither Ron nor Harry nor Hermione has signed
					up for the class. In the past, the three classmates only endured
					Care of Magical Creatures out of devotion to Hagrid, and they wonder
					what he will think when he finds out his three best students are
					no longer interested.

The next morning, Harry fills Hermione on what he overheard
					in the Slytherin compartment. Like Ron, Hermione is doubtful about Draco’s
					relationship to Voldemort. Hermione is more concerned about what
					Hagrid will think when he realizes that none of them have signed
					up for his class. Before classes begin, Heads of House must sort
					out the students’ schedules, confirming that each student has received
					the necessary O.W.L. grade to continue on with their chosen N.E.W.T.s.
					When it is Harry’s turn, Professor McGonagall asks why he is not
					continuing with Potions if it is still his desire to one day be
					an Auror. Harry explains that he did not think his O.W.L. score
					was acceptable, but McGonagall tells him Slughorn has lower requirements
					than Snape, and Harry can continue. Harry tells her that he did
					not buy any of the proper books or ingredients, but McGonagall insists
					that he can easily borrow them. Moments later, Ron is cleared for
					the same set of subjects: Charms, Defense Against the Dark Arts,
					Herbology, Transfiguration, and Potions.

In Defense Against the Dark Arts, students begin work
					on nonverbal spells. When Harry mouths off to Snape, he receives
					a detention for Saturday night. Later, Harry receives a scroll from Dumbledore,
					announcing that their first private lesson will be Saturday night.
					Delighted that he has a valid excuse to skip Snape’s detention,
					Harry heads off to Slughorn’s Potions class. Harry and Ron ask Slughorn
					to borrow two Potions textbooks. Slughorn complies, digging two
					used books out of a cupboard. Slughorn tells the class that the
					creator of the best potion will win a small vial of Felix Felicis,
					an extraordinarily lucky potion. Harry opens his used textbook to
					the appropriate page, but he finds it difficult to read because the
					previous owner has scribbled notes all over the pages. Finally, Harry
					opts to follow the alternate instructions written in the margins,
					and his potion turns out perfectly. Slughorn is delighted and awards
					Harry the vial of Felix Felicis, but Hermione is outraged and accuses
					Harry of cheating. Harry notices some writing along the bottom of
					the back cover. It reads: “This Book is the Property of the Half-Blood
					Prince.”

Harry’s fascination with Draco continues to grow in this
					section. Harry is so convinced of Draco Malfoy’s guilt that he can
					think of little else. Already, he has twice used his Invisibility
					Cloak to follow Draco and spy on Draco when he thinks he’s alone.
					These episodes reflect Harry’s bravery but also demonstrate his
					inability or unwillingness to think ahead. While Harry does overhear
					some incriminatory talk between Draco and the other Slytherins in
					his cabin, Draco obviously suspects Harry’s presence and says nothing
					that could not be excused as showing off to his friends. Likewise,
					when Harry, Ron, and Hermione listen in to Draco’s conversation
					with Borgin, they are not ready to deal with what they hear. Instead,
					Hermione rushes into the shop prematurely and without a suitable
					plan and ends up raising Borgin’s suspicions and getting herself
					kicked out of the shop. Clearly, Harry’s use of his Invisibility
					Cloak to follow Draco around has not been without its hardships
					and complications, most of which have been caused by a lack of foresight.
					As Dumbledore explains in Book V, Harry’s education must come slowly
					and unfold over time. Harry, however, is more interested in knowing
					everything as quickly as possible and often gets himself into unfortunate
					predicaments as a result.

When the train arrives at Hogwarts, Harry’s cover is compromised,
					Draco freezes him, and he gets himself into an impossible situation,
					unable to protect himself from attack or even leave the train. When
					Tonks suddenly appears to help Harry, it becomes clear that Dumbledore
					and the Order are taking special care to protect Harry this year.
					Tonks tells Harry that she didn’t see him leave the train and realized
					he might be hiding. She came on board to make sure he was safe,
					but her timing is suspiciously perfect. When Harry asks what she
					was doing in Hogsmeade, Tonks tells him she has been stationed there,
					but it seems far more likely that she’s actually been assigned to watch
					over Harry and make sure he remains safe. Harry does not seem to
					understand Tonks’s role in his wellbeing and is simply relieved
					to have been rescued and allowed to return to school.

Harry has never been an especially strong Potions student,
					and with Snape as his instructor he always found Potions confounding and
					useless. Still, Slughorn continually reminds Harry how his mother,
					Lily, excelled at Potions, and Harry has figured out that he can
					use the Half-Blood Prince’s textbook to emulate her success. Hermione
					is skeptical of and annoyed by the Prince’s book, mostly because
					she is such a strong student and finds Harry’s use of the Prince’s
					notes to be unfair and unethical. When Harry wins the vial of Felix
					Felicis, Hermione is angry that her role in Harry’s life is being
					threatened. Typically, Hermione is the only one of the three friends
					who can figure out their schoolwork, make the correct potions, write
					the acceptable essays, and answer the hard questions. When Harry
					finds a way to bypass Hermione’s help, she feels hurt and betrayed.
					She believes that Harry is taking an unnecessary shortcut and that
					the Prince’s advice may be either dangerous or incorrect. She is
					envious and troubled by Harry’s newfound study help and cannot seem
					to understand why he refuses to give the book back.

