“When life hands you a lemon, say, ‘Oh
						yeah. I like lemons. What else ya got?’”

Lena has breakfast with her grandfather, but they can’t
					talk to each other. She thinks she looks like him, with his small
					nose. She puts on the Pants and sets off with her paints. She runs
					into Kostos but walks in the opposite direction.

Bridget writes to Tibby, claiming she’d hate the soccer
					camp since it’s very peppy. She also says she’s in love with a coach,
					even though it’s forbidden.

At Wallman’s, Tibby realizes that she forgot to return
					the girl’s wallet. The girl’s name is Bailey Graffman, and Tibby
					finds a Graffman in the phone book and goes to the house, where
					Mrs. Graffman sends her up to Bailey’s room. Bailey accuses her
					of stealing her money. Tibby sarcastically stands up for herself,
					and Bailey responds equally sharply. Tibby finds out that Bailey
					is actually twelve. Mrs. Graffman calls up and tells Bailey she
					should take her medicine. Tibby goes to get it, and Mrs. Graffman
					reveals that Bailey has leukemia. Tibby tries to be nicer to Bailey,
					who gets upset because she knows that Tibby now knows she’s sick.

Lena writes to Carmen about Greece. She mentions Kostos
					but dismisses the idea of dating him.

Carmen sits by herself at a party, miserable. She went
					to the party with Krista and Paul to make Albert happy, but she
					knew she would have an awful time. Paul introduces her to his girlfriend,
					Kelly, and Carmen says she lives with Paul just to make Kelly suspicious.

“I have seen the future and it’s like
						the present, only longer.”

Tibby helps her mother feed her baby brother, Nicky, while
					her mother feeds the other baby, Katherine. Tibby remembers when
					her mother was a sculptor and her dad was a public defender. Their house
					was less fancy then. When her mother became a real estate agent
					and her dad became a private lawyer, everything changed. Tibby wants
					to tell her mom about Bailey, but feeding the kids is too chaotic.

Bridget watches Eric eat dinner. She gets up for more
					food and stops to talk to him on her way back to her table, impressing
					her friends. She writes to Carmen and says she’s been flirting with
					Eric and sightseeing in a nearby town.

To make her last day with the Pants count, Lena takes
					a long walk and finds an isolated pond, where she begins to paint.
					When she gets too hot, Lena takes off all her clothes and gets into
					the water. Suddenly, she hears a sound and stands up—only to find
					Kostos looking at her. She grabs her clothes, accusing Kostos of
					spying on her. Kostos apologizes awkwardly and walks away. Lena, enraged,
					storms home, not caring that her clothes are askew. When her grandmother
					asks what happened, Lena says only that Kostos isn’t a nice boy
					like her grandmother thought.

Carmen and Tibby have both faced awkward family changes,
					in which one or both parents change from living haphazardly to being settled
					and traditional. When Carmen thought about her summer with her father,
					she imagined living with him in his sparse one-bedroom apartment,
					which, in her mind, lacked essential “home” things like curtains
					and baking soda in the refrigerator. She knew her father ate dinner
					out every night instead of cooking at home, and she looked forward
					to that too. Tibby’s parents were once hippies, and they tried to
					live simple lives without a lot of material things. Tibby remembers
					the Mexican candlesticks and other objects her parents used to have
					and use. To the surprise of Carmen and Tibby, their parents have
					given up their unsettled lifestyles for lives that are more traditional.
					Carmen’s father has gotten engaged and moved into a comfortable
					home with everything Carmen can imagine “home” having, including
					Kleenex box covers and dust ruffles. Tibby’s parents have gotten
					lucrative jobs and now like to go shopping for nice things. They’ve
					replaced their Mexican candlesticks with ones from Pottery Barn,
					and they’ve put away signs of Tibby’s childhood, including salt
					and pepper shakers she had made. In a way, Carmen’s dad and Tibby’s
					parents have grown up, finally settling into lives that have shape
					and structure.

Both Carmen and Tibby liked the way their parents used
					to be, and they’re unsure about what their roles are in their new
					family lives and reluctant to participate in their families’ changes.
					They find themselves awkwardly caught between the past and the present,
					as if their parents had forged ahead and left them behind. For example, Carmen
					is uncomfortable in the guest room, since she doesn’t want to feel
					like a guest around her own father. In his old apartment, she would
					have felt needed and wanted—as if she belonged. She’s also uncomfortable
					around her soon-to-be stepmother, stepbrother, and stepsister. At
					the party she goes to with Krista and Paul, she doesn’t even know
					how to explain her relationship to them when she meets other people.
					She reacts bitterly, causing friction between people with established
					relationships, especially Paul and his girlfriend. Carmen feels
					displaced, unsure of her identity in her father’s new life. Tibby
					has a similar struggle. Once an only child, she now has two baby
					siblings that she is expected to help care for, and she must assume
					an unfamiliar parenting role. She also feels like she must keep
					details about her life private because her mother is too busy to listen
					to her, even though Tibby would like to open up about her new experiences.
					Both Carmen and Tibby find themselves strangely on their own, forced
					to accept changes they’re not crazy about and act more mature than
					they actually feel.

