A thirteen-year-old slave and the protagonist of the novel. Isabel knows how to read, which is unusual for slaves, and considers herself entitled to freedom because her deceased mistress freed her in her will. Isabel is resourceful and highly intelligent, physically strong, and passionate. She fluctuates between allegiance to herself and others and between fear and courage, but she is resilient and learns from her mistakes. She suffers all forms of abuse in the narrative yet remains loyal to her sister, Ruth, and her friend Curzon.

Read an in-depth analysis of Isabel.

A five-year-old slave and younger sister to Isabel. Ruth suffers from seizures, which makes her fearsome to the woman who eventually owns her. A simple-minded girl, she depends on Isabel to protect her from harm and abuse. In the middle of the novel, Ruth disappears from New York.

A slave to Mr. Bellingham and a dedicated patriot. Curzon immediately likes Isabel and helps her however he can. He draws Isabel into the patriot cause by telling her that her espionage may result in her freedom. Curzon is physically strong and confident, but his strength is sapped by the war and nearly depleted when he is shot and imprisoned.

Read an in-depth analysis of Curzon.

A bitter and cruel slave owner and wife to Elihu Lockton, a wealthy businessman. Madam hates the rebels and hates her slaves. Perversely, she finds entertainment in the simple-minded child Ruth. She loves high society and all forms of adornment and pretention. The novel’s antagonist, Madam tells lies and hides truths, and she often threatens and abuses Isabel.

Read an in-depth analysis of Madam.

A wealthy British merchant who works against the rebel cause. With others like him, Lockton schemes the rebels’ defeat with money, corruption, and lies. A coward, he flees the city and later escapes to England to protect himself. Lockton abuses his wife, Madam Anne Lockton, and hides behind his own sense of self-worth.

Read an in-depth analysis of Elihu Lockton.

A leader in the patriot cause and owner of Curzon. He meets the Locktons when they arrive in New York City and wants to inspect their crates, but he backs down when Madam objects. Curzon convinces Isabel that if she wins Bellingham’s favor, Bellingham will help her track down the will that proves her freedom.

The person who dies at the beginning of the novel. Mary owns Ruth and Isabel, but she treated them and their mother, Dinah/Momma, kindly. She lives alone on a farm in Rhode Island and teaches Isabel to read.

The elderly aunt of Mr. Lockton and a wealthy widow who owns several properties including a mansion in New York City. She is fond of Isabel and Ruth and shields them from Madam, her evil niece-in-law. She nearly dies in the fire but is rescued by Isabel. Later, as she lies dying from a stroke, Lady Seymour tries to apologize to Isabel for not buying her from Madam and helping her more. She is generous and compassionate, even in her final moments of life.

The white servant who works for the Locktons and manages the maintenance of their household. Becky teaches Isabel her job and tries, in vain, to protect her from Madam’s wrath. Becky is a practical woman who has had a hard life. She lives apart from the Lockton household and flees the city when conditions get dangerous.

An elderly slave who claims to be the grandfather of everyone and everything. He has a scar on his face that reminds Isabel of her father’s scar. He runs the Tea Water Pump where slaves line up to get buckets of fresh water for their households. He is wise and practical and believes that crossing the River Jordan, a metaphor for freedom, will eventually happen for all the slaves.

Mary’s sole living relative who visits her, waits for her to die, takes her money and her slaves, and sells them to the Locktons. Finch is selfish and mean, and his depravity sets the narrative into motion. Isabel calls him “the snake.”

The head of the soldier wives who move into the Locktons’ home after the war begins. A hardy, independent woman, Sarah makes a deal that allows Isabel to fetch water every morning even though Madam forbids it. Sarah gives birth to a baby whom she names after the king.

Another soldier wife who takes over the Lockton household management after Sarah gives birth and leaves. Like Sarah, Hannah shows some kindness to Isabel.

A rebel soldier who becomes the head of the section of the prison where Curzon is held. Dibdin believes that Curzon should not be given food or treatment because he is a slave.

A rebel captain who uses Isabel to convey messages to others. Morse informs the prisoners about the victory in Trenton and sends Isabel to Captain Farrar to repay a gambling debt.

A rebel captain. Captain Farrar sends the note to Captain Morse, which sets off Madam’s final abusive fight with Isabel.

The large guard who lets Isabel into the prison in exchange for first dibs at the food scraps she brings for Curzon.

The pastor who conducts Mary Finch’s funeral. He tells Isabel to mind her place and that Finch is their new owner now despite Isabel’s insistence about Mary’s will.

