On some undressed bodies, the burns had
					made patterns—of undershirt straps and suspenders and, on the skin
					of some women (since white repelled the heat from the bomb and dark
					clothes absorbed it and conducted it to the skin), the shapes of
					flowers they had had on their kimonos.	

At first Mr. Tanimoto believes that the damage is limited
					to the area around him, but he climbs to get a view and realizes
					the extent of the destruction. A cloud of smoke, dust, and heat
					has arisen from the center of the city, and the wind is rapidly
					spreading the fire. He runs toward the center of the city in a frantic
					search for his wife and baby daughter, seeing hundreds of severely
					injured and burned people traveling in the opposite direction. As
					he runs, he passes ruins of buildings, where he hears people cry
					for help from under the rubble of wrecked houses. Mr. Tanimoto is
					ashamed that he is not injured as well and often asks the pardon
					of people whom he passes. Miraculously, he finds his wife with the
					baby, both unhurt, while he is running through the streets.

	Mrs. Nakamura digs her three children out of the rubble
					of her house and discovers that they are unharmed. She gathers them
					up and then deposits her sewing machine—her sole means of livelihood—into
					a cement water tank. At a neighbor’s suggestion they head for Asano
					Park, an estate on the outskirts of the city designated as an evacuation
					area, while passing many people trapped in fallen buildings.

	At the mission house, Father Kleinsorge is slightly injured,
					but one of the other priests, Father Schiffer, is bleeding from
					the head and requires immediate medical attention. While some of
					the other priests attempt to take the man to a doctor and dig victims
					out from nearby houses, Father Kleinsorge collects some of his belongings. Although
					his quarters are in total disarray, he finds that his papier-mâché
					suitcase, which contains some of his important papers and money,
					is completely unscratched and stands upright in the doorway. Father
					Kleinsorge believes God saved it from the wreckage. The other priests
					are unable to reach a doctor because of the fire, and so the group
					heads for Asano Park. Mr. Fukai, the secretary of the diocese, is
					unwilling to leave the mission house, and Father Kleinsorge must
					forcefully carry him on his back along the road. Father Kleinsorge,
					still weakened from diarrhea, cannot carry his burden for long,
					and when he stumbles, Mr. Fukai runs back into the fire, never to
					be seen again.

	Both Dr. Sasaki and Dr. Fujii survive the blast, but
					Dr. Fujii is hurt and his clinic has completely collapsed, killing
					four nurses and his only two patients. As the fire spreads, he and
					many others take refuge in the river. Dr. Sasaki is one of the few
					doctors in all of Hiroshima who have not been killed or injured.
					About 10,000 wounded
					people crowd into and outside of his hospital, which has only 600 beds.
					Wearing someone else’s glasses and completely confused, Dr. Sasaki
					works frantically to help as many of the badly wounded patients
					as he can. Dr. Fujii later makes his way to his parents’ house in
					the suburbs. He is puzzled about what weapon could have caused such
					destruction.

	Miss Sasaki, at the tin works factory, has been severely
					injured—her leg is so badly broken below the knee that she believes
					it has been cut off. For a long time, she is pinned below the bookcase,
					barely conscious, until she is finally pulled from the wreckage
					and put under a makeshift shelter in the company of two severely
					injured people.

	Asano Park survives the explosion relatively intact,
					and serves for a time as a safe haven for many of the citizens of
					Hiroshima, who lay suffering in silence. Many, including Mrs. Nakamura
					and her children, drink river water to quell their burning thirst,
					and they spend the rest of the day vomiting by the riverbanks as
					a result. The spreading fire soon threatens the park, and the overcrowding
					of the riverbanks forces a number of people into the river to drown.
					Mr. Tanimoto leads a group of volunteers, including Father Kleinsorge, to
					put out the fire using clothing and buckets of water. He also finds a
					boat and begins ferrying people who cannot move themselves. It starts
					to rain and the wind increases, turning into powerful whirlwinds
					that knock down trees.

	Mr. Tanimoto and Father Kleinsorge head back into town
					to get provisions for the group. Back at the park they meet Mrs.
					Kamai, Mr. Tanimoto’s next-door neighbor, who clutches a dead baby
					in her arms. She is frantically searching for her husband, a soldier;
					Mr. Tanimoto presumes he is dead.

The death toll statistics from Hiroshima can be difficult
					to comprehend by themselves. By combining statistics with first-hand accounts,
					Hershey personalizes the tragedy, and gives us a greater sense of
					what the numbers of dead and wounded mean. Hersey rarely takes the
					focus away from his six major figures, and through their eyes we
					are able to get a vivid picture of the destruction. The characters
					see countless homes collapsed and hear cries of “Tasukete kure!”
					(“Help, if you please!”) coming from under the rubble. Hersey explains
					everything from the bomb’s effects upon the weather to the types
					of burns many people suffered. Hersey also introduces compelling
					statistics, citing the number of people killed or injured and the
					reasons why many of those who died could have been saved. Nearly
					half of the 150 doctors in the city died
					instantly, and few of those who survived had access to hospitals
					or equipment.

	Hersey chooses his statistics carefully; he does not
					simply record the extent of damage the same way a report from the
					war department might relate information. In fact, Hersey takes great
					pains to show his readers how the atomic bomb was uniquely devastating.
					In 1946, it was common for American military
					leaders to depict the A-bomb to the public as just another type
					of firebombing. Hersey, on the other hand, wants the public to appreciate
					exactly how the A-bomb was a horrifically efficient weapon. It destroyed
					buildings and burned people miles away from the center of the blast;
					it decimated hospitals, killed doctors, and blocked paths to safety;
					its destruction continued long after the original explosion as fires
					spread throughout the city.

	Chapter Two describes the complete confusion of the citizens
					of Hiroshima, and emphasizes the fact that nobody has any idea what happened.
					While most are prepared for some kind of attack, the power of the
					bomb comes as a complete surprise. Various explanations are suggested:
					some believe that the Americans have dropped a “Molotov flower basket,”
					a self-scattering bomb cluster, or have sprayed gasoline across
					the roofs of Hiroshima’s houses in order to help the fire spread.
					Hersey notes that “even a theory was comforting that day.” Because
					President Truman did not warn the citizens of Hiroshima before the
					bomb was dropped, either through official channels or by dropping
					leaflets by plane through the city, the citizens had no idea of
					America’s nuclear capabilities.

	Stylistically, Chapter Two showcases Hersey’s talents
					both as a narrative storyteller and as a journalist capable of careful
					observation and reportage. Even as he includes statistics about
					the explosion, he never takes the focus off his main characters,
					and as a result we are riveted by these six human stories. Because
					he switches the narrative from one character to the other, never
					lingering too long on one individual, each of the stories appears
					to proceed simultaneously, as if we are able to follow the progression
					of the events all at once.

