Howard Roark finds hard but satisfying work at the Francon
					granite quarry. Dominique lives alone on her father’s estate, a
					few miles from the quarry. She spends most of her time walking through
					the countryside. On one particularly hot day she visits her father’s quarry.
					There she sees Roark drilling away at the rock. Their eyes meet
					and his gaze is one of ownership. She immediately hates him because
					she knows she could fall in love with him. Later, Dominique fights
					the desire to visit the quarry again but cannot help herself. Roark
					looks at her with the same intense gaze. Several days later, they
					meet at the quarry. Their first real encounter is intimate. Dominique
					wants to know that Roark suffers and asks him if the work is tiresome.
					Roark tells her that sometimes he cannot move his arms at night.
					Dominique asks him why he works there and he replies that he is
					there for the money she pays him.

Every day, Dominique fights the compulsion to visit Roark.
					She eventually begins to feel safe in her house, but wants to test
					her resolve. Dominique makes a long scratch in the marble fireplace
					and hires Roark to repair the damage. He casually agrees to come,
					making her weak with shame and pleasure. When Roark arrives at Dominique’s
					house, he splits the marble and offers to order a new piece of stone.
					When the marble arrives, Dominique sends for Roark, but he sends
					an old laborer in his place. Later, at the quarry, Dominique asks
					Roark why he sent the other worker, and he wonders why she cares.
					Three evenings later, Dominique is sitting in her bedroom when Roark
					enters. He takes her in his arms roughly. She fights him, but he
					overpowers her. Roark then rapes her like “a master taking shameful,
					contemptuous possession” of a slave. Dominique realizes that this
					humiliation is exactly what she wants and that if Roark had behaved
					tenderly, she would have remained cold. Roark leaves without a word.

	A week later, an industrialist named Roger Enright hires
					Roark and Roark leaves for New York. When Dominique discovers that Roark
					has left, she feels relief that she is no longer vulnerable, and reasons
					that she will never see him again.

Peter Keating is enjoying his newfound success when he
					receives an envelope from Ellsworth Toohey. Inside the envelope
					is a draft of Toohey’s next column, a dazzling tribute to Keating
					and his work. Toohey also encloses a request for a meeting with
					Keating. Later that day, Keating learns that a sculptor named Stephen
					Mallory has tried to kill Toohey. Keating’s first reaction to this
					news is to wonder whether Toohey’s article will still be published.
					The attack leaves Toohey uninjured. Keating visits Toohey as soon
					as he can. A thin, narrow-chested, fragile little man, Toohey is
					not at all what Keating expected, but the two men get along well.
					Toohey asks Keating to join an informal group of young architects
					Toohey is putting together. He tells Keating that the group will
					meet once in a while to share ideas, and that Keating can be chairman.

Toohey invites Keating to tea. Katie is there, but she
					sits silently staring into space. Toohey interrogates Keating about
					Roark, even though Toohey has never mentioned Roark in his column.
					Toohey also arranges a commission for Keating. Lois Cook, a fashionable author
					who writes complicated but empty books, wants to build the ugliest
					house in New York. Keating accepts the project.

Dominique returns to New York. She is at work at the Banner when Toohey
					visits her. He notices a picture of the Enright House on her desk.
					She tells him that an architect who could conceive such a beautiful
					thing should never allow it to be erected for people to ruin. She adds
					that the building is too good for men like Toohey. The Council of
					American Builders, Toohey’s group of architects, has a first meeting. Of
					its eighteen members, only two are distinguished. The members denounce
					the state of modern architecture but offer no suggestions for improvement.
					Toohey delivers a melodramatic speech that Dominique interrupts.
					The council members feel uncomfortable in her presence. After the
					meeting, Keating tries to kiss Dominique, but his advances repulse
					her. He demands to know whom she has met. She tells him about the
					workman in Connecticut.

In these chapters, Rand begins to reveal more of Dominique’s
					motivations and nature. Dominique is a masochist who refuses to
					let herself become attached to anything or anyone and lives her
					life amidst the very things that torture her. She loathes society
					specifically because she so passionately believes in human perfection
					and views society as a threat to this perfection. She has a great
					appreciation for what is pure, beautiful, and strong, and she firmly
					believes that the world destroys all that is good. This sentiment
					grips her so strongly that she would rather break a perfect vase
					than see it used by the unworthy. All around her she finds men without
					character and men who borrow their beliefs and principles from others.
					She hates such men not because of their failings but because she
					sees them ruin the world, and she thus lives her life in a cold,
					spiteful way. She refuses to love anyone or anything for fear that
					the world will destroy what she loves, and she surrounds herself
					with those people she likes the least, knowing that she will be
					in no danger of falling in love with them. Dominique’s encounter
					with Roark derails her loveless existence, as she finds herself
					caring for a man with vision and character. True to her philosophy,
					she does not celebrate this turn of events. She fears the world
					will destroy this good man, so she decides to destroy him first.

Rand presents Dominique’s rape as a violent but necessary encounter—as
					just what Dominique needs. Her depiction of woman as stubborn and
					frigid and man as masterful and healing might shock the modern reader.
					It should shock, and is partly meant to shock, but it is also not
					quite an act of sexual violence between two lifelike characters.
					Rand shapes characters that are symbols, not real people. Thus the
					coupling of Roark and Dominique is the coupling of symbols, not
					the coupling of people, and the rape is more an abstract meditation
					on violence and frigidity than the hideous violation of a woman
					by a man. Roark’s rape of Dominique dramatizes the violence and
					force of their mental union. Although Roark is the rapist, he is
					also the victim, for he cannot resist Dominique and becomes a slave
					to his passions. Dominique resists not just Roark, but her own attraction
					to Roark. By fighting him, Dominique tries to rid herself of her
					desires. Neither character utters a word during the rape, a silence
					that suggests the oneness of their minds and contrasts with the
					physicality of the encounter. Rand foreshadows the rape when Dominique
					first sees Roark drilling at the granite quarry and cannot stop
					staring at him. She resents her fascination with him and hopes that
					Roark will succumb to the difficulty of the task. Instead, he continues
					and manages to crack the rock, in a gesture symbolizing his later
					success at shattering Dominique’s emotional wall.

Toohey’s character also develops significantly in these
					chapters, and we see his influence and social control grow. Toohey
					wants to change the nature of the social soil so that men like Roark
					can never grow again. He destroys beauty, such as that which Roark
					embodies, and in its place enshrines mediocrity, such as that which
					Keating embodies. Once Toohey has made gods of people like Keating,
					the truly talented cannot compete. He tells the small circle of
					young architects that beauty lies in the small and the everyday.
					He does not encourage them to look to abstract ideals or demanding
					standards. He does not expect anything of them and thus they are
					entirely comfortable achieving nothing too large. Toohey, in his
					championing of the common and the average, is the antithesis of
					everything for which Roark stands and for which Dominique yearns:
					genius, independence, and perfection. In Rand’s scheme of the world,
					a handful of men like Roark create, produce, and inspire, while
					a larger, swarming majority huddle together to destroy, level, and
					belittle. True rebellion is born in the hearts of independent men,
					and through his influence Toohey tries to wipe the world clean of
					such men. Only when genius is eradicated can someone like Toohey
					hold power.

