Early morning, Big Round Top. From the hill’s summit,
					Chamberlain watches the sun rise. Chamberlain’s foot is still bleeding,
					and he has to keep moving to ignore the pain. His men are low on
					rations and hungry. Tom appears and offers Chamberlain some coffee. Chamberlain
					accepts it gratefully and remembers that he used his own brother
					to plug a hole in the front line the previous day. He misses Kilrain,
					who is absent because of his injury, and Chamberlain wishes he could
					talk to him. Tom reveals that he did not use his bayonet the previous
					day, as he could not bring himself to stab anyone. He points out
					that Chamberlain was never scared.

	Chamberlain notices some artillery begin to
					fire in the north. He thinks they might be attacked again, but now
					the men have dug in deep and have plenty of ammunition. An aide
					arrives and says that Chamberlain’s regiment has been relieved.
					The relief brigade quickly arrives, and the aide leads Chamberlain’s
					men away and toward a “safe place” to rest, “right smack dab in
					the center of the line.”

Morning, Confederate camp. Longstreet is preparing for
					the assault he knows is coming. There is still an opportunity to
					move southeast, but Union cavalry is quickly closing in on his army’s
					flank. Lee arrives and the two ride out to survey the battlefield.
					Longstreet makes one last attempt to persuade Lee to move south,
					but Lee responds, “The enemy is there . . . and there’s where I’m
					going to strike him.” Lee wants Longstreet to move, with Pickett’s
					fresh division in front, and split the Union line in the middle.
					Longstreet objects—he has lost half of his men, and one of his best
					officers, Hood, is injured. If he moves forward, the entire rear
					of the army is exposed. He informs Lee that it is his military opinion
					that a frontal assault will be a disaster.

	But Lee is certain that the Union lines will break, and
					he sees no alternative. Before Longstreet can say anything, there
					is the sound of gunfire to the north. Apparently, Ewell has engaged
					the enemy without orders. But Lee and Longstreet soon discover that
					Union soldiers have actually attacked Ewell while he was getting
					ready, and their action surprises the Confederate officers. Ewell’s
					battle begins to mount, and Lee makes his firm decision to charge
					the Union center. He tells Longstreet that he must reach a clump
					of trees on Cemetery Ridge. Longstreet replies, one last time, that
					he thinks the attack will fail, but Lee dismisses his concerns.
					Longstreet becomes despondent. He knows Lee will not relieve him
					and give the attack to someone else, because there is no one else
					capable of leading the charge. Yet he also knows that it is doomed
					to fail. Longstreet’s depressed mood comes close to despair.

	But Longstreet forces himself to move on, knowing that
					he cannot reveal his doubts to his officers. He orders the artillery
					commander, Alexander, to fire at the hill with as much ammunition
					as he has. Once Alexander thinks enough damage has been dealt, he
					is to let Longstreet know so the attack can begin.

	Longstreet meets with his generals and describes the
					plan. They are all inspired and moved by the heroic plan, and they
					do not realize how hopeless it is. Longstreet is certain there will
					be terrible casualties. Longstreet knows there is nothing he can
					do but watch.

In Chapter 1, Shaara makes his
					biggest departure from historical fact. He moves the Twentieth Maine
					from Big Round Top to a position in the center of the Union line,
					right where the Confederates attack the next day. But in fact, Chamberlain’s
					regiment was moved to a ridge just north of Little Round Top, three
					quarters of a mile south of the line’s center. Shaara makes this
					significant departure from history to show the Union perspective
					on Pickett’s Charge. Moving Chamberlain also heightens the novel’s
					drama by putting the Twentieth Maine once again in harm’s way.

	Chapter 2 focuses again
					on the struggle between Lee and Longstreet. It may seem frustrating
					that Longstreet, despite his vocal objections, never tries actively
					to prevent Lee from making the charge. Longstreet struggles with
					Lee in private, and when Lee proves obstinate, Longstreet backs
					down. Yet Longstreet does not seem like a weak-willed man—he is
					himself quite stubborn. One reason for the conflict may be that
					Shaara’s allegiance to historical fact abbreviates his poetic license.
					Dramatically, it would make sense for Longstreet to persevere with
					Lee until Lee agreed, but since this is not actually what happened
					in the Civil War, Shaara’s own rules about his novel’s adherence
					to historical fact prevent him from portraying such an event. Longstreet
					follows Lee’s orders in The Killer Angels because
					of his great respect for the man, and his knowledge that the Confederate
					troops think of Lee almost as a demigod. For Longstreet to go against Lee
					would be to make himself unpopular. Historically, however, Longstreet
					is responsible for his own share of personal mistakes in the battle.
					Furthermore, when Lee goes to see Longstreet on the morning of July 3,
					Longstreet is actually drawing up orders to move his men south and
					flank the Union right—he is ready take action despite Lee’s opposition.
					Lee does not let Longstreet move the troops, and is also annoyed
					that Longstreet is unprepared to attack the Union’s left flank,
					as Lee had originally planned. The plan, known as Pickett’s Charge,
					was actually conceived then, in the morning. Shaara captures the
					gloominess of Longstreet that morning—he knew many men would die
					and that the plan would very likely fail.

