The narrative jumps to a Sunday, three years after Mr.
					McEachern adopts Joe. In his calm, cold, yet not unkind manner,
					the strictly Presbyterian McEachern chides his adopted son for not
					learning his catechism by heart. He gives Joe another hour to try
					before he begins beating the child in the stable, asking him at
					hourly intervals whether he has committed the passages to memory.
					When Joe does not respond, McEachern whips him again with the strap.
					Eventually, Joe passes out.

Joe wakes several hours later to the sight of his father
					seated beside him on the bed. McEachern makes Joe kneel beside the
					bed and pray for forgiveness before placing the catechism once again
					in the child’s hands. After McEachern leaves to attend a distant
					church service, Joe’s adoptive mother brings him a tray of food.
					Despite her insistence that Mr. McEachern knows nothing about the
					food, Joe takes the tray and angrily dumps it upside down in the
					corner. Only later, alone and famished, does he eat the food off
					the floor “like a dog.”

Several years later, at the age of fourteen, Joe and the
					other farm boys lure a young, willing black woman into a darkened
					shed to have sex. When Joe’s turn comes, he begins to beat the woman.
					The other boys subdue him, but only after using considerable force. When
					they finally release the seething Joe, he returns home to face his
					father’s punishment for not completing the evening chores. His father,
					knowing his son is growing up quickly, asks Joe whether he has been
					with a woman.

At seventeen, Joe sells his calf without his father’s
					approval and buys a suit with the money. His father finds the suit
					hidden in the hay loft and asks where the calf is. Joe lies. Having
					revealed Joe’s blasphemy and false truths, McEachern punches his
					son twice in the face. Joe, able to defend himself, advises his
					father to stop the beatings. Later, Joe’s foster mother tells her
					husband that she purchased the suit herself with her butter money.
					Calling her a liar, Mr. McEachern forces his wife to beg God for
					forgiveness.

Joe muses that Mrs. McEachern has always tried to be kind
					to him, from her first fumbling attempts to be his mother to her
					later fumbling attempts to deflect Mr. McEachern’s wrath away from him.
					Joe, however, feels that the punishments would be bearable and impersonal
					if Mrs. McEachern were not always trying to make them seem personal.
					He thus hates Mrs. McEachern bitterly, despite the fact that the
					beatings and forced labor come from his father. He believes that
					she is always trying to make him cry.

His parents finally asleep, seventeen-year-old Joe silently
					shimmies down a rope that he has rigged outside his bedroom window.
					Scurrying into the barn, he puts on his new suit and consults his
					new watch, which he has forgotten to wind. Ready, he heads down
					to the road and waits for his date to pick him up in her car and
					take them to the dance.

Joe recalls how he first met the woman in town, accompanying his
					foster father on a trip to meet with a lawyer. When the consultation
					runs late, Mr. McEachern takes them to a dingy back-alley restaurant,
					staffed by a thirty-year-old waitress. After the two gulp down their
					food, Mr. McEachern tells Joe that the restaurant is the type of
					place he should always avoid and that he must never enter the establishment
					again. On the next trip to see the lawyer, Joe’s father gives him
					a dime. Joe immediately heads to the restaurant and orders pie and
					coffee from the same waitress. When he realizes he has enough only
					for the pie, the waitress covers for him when the proprietor’s wife
					notices.

Joe, unnerved by his sexual attraction to the waitress,
					avoids town and tries to lose himself in bouts of hard work. His
					father rewards his efforts by giving Joe a heifer. But Joe suddenly
					resumes his interest in going to town and accompanies his father
					on the next trip, carrying a half dollar that his foster mother
					has secretly given him. When he returns to the restaurant and tries
					to pay the nickel for the coffee he ordered last time, he is laughed
					at and quickly leaves, only to bump into Bobbie, the waitress, on
					the street. Two days later, Joe is early for the nighttime rendezvous
					that they have planned. Bobbie saunters up and tells him she is
					menstruating—a process that is not altogether familiar to the sheltered
					Joe. He strikes her and runs off, only to return a week later to
					drag her hastily into the bushes, where he has sex for the first
					time.

Soon, the two are seeing each other regularly, and Joe
					is stealing more and more money from his foster mother, all the
					while unaware that Bobbie is a prostitute whom the restaurant’s
					proprietors, Max and Mame, brought to town with them. Joe visits
					Bobbie at Max and Mame’s, where he is also given his first taste
					of alcohol. When he shows up to meet her on the street corner one
					evening and she does not appear, he goes to her window to discover
					she is entertaining another man inside. At their next meeting, he
					strikes her repeatedly before she calms him down and explains to
					him that she is a prostitute. Before long, Joe has been fully seduced
					into a life of carousing, and though his mother notices the missing
					money, his father still has no idea what his adopted son has been
					up to.

Throughout Light in August, Faulkner
					explores the importance of memory amid the various layers of consciousness
					and thought that contribute to an action, motivation, or story.
					This approach gives us a more dynamic and complex understanding
					of character, gesturing to the parts of an individual that words
					cannot access or elucidate. For all the thoughts, impulses, and
					articulation that help define a person, there is always an unspoken
					element, the haunting record of the past that can never be expunged.
					Amid this seeming confusion, memory emerges as a potent and supreme
					form of knowledge, or personal truth. For Joe Christmas, memory
					consists of a painful personal history, an autobiography told not
					in facts and events but in an ever-present and instinctively referenced
					record of humiliation, abuse, and shame.

For Joe, memory is a burden that cannot be erased or escaped. No
					matter how far or fast he attempts to run from his past, it is always
					contained within him, in his conscious recollection of all that has
					transpired in his life and led to his fateful months residing in
					Jefferson. Rather than provide Joe with solid grounding from which
					to draw support and stability, his past is a chronicle of debasement
					in which he is systemically dehumanized—not only by those around him
					but also by his own actions. Instead of a unified and focused sense
					of self, Joe has a precarious lack of identity, which serves only as
					a backdrop for the gradual unraveling of his life. We see that Joe begins
					the gradual and inexorable hollowing of himself even in his formative
					years, and we see later see how this hollowing leads eventually
					to his violent rampages. With his own life and sense of self so emptied
					and devalued, mercilessly taking the lives of others becomes a tragic,
					if not inevitable, result. Ultimately, the mystery of Joe’s ambiguous
					identity is solved only when it is too late and no longer of any
					value to the troubled man.

Joe is an imprisoned subject, unable to fully embrace
					or embody his identity, yet unable to achieve the escape and release
					he desperately seeks. He longs to run away from the McEacherns but
					remains trapped and static. At one point, Faulkner, in one of a
					number of animal images associated with Joe, compares his protagonist
					to an eagle, “though he did not then know that, like the eagle,
					his own flesh as well as all space was still a cage.” Joe’s roiling
					and explosive anger is like that of a caged beast, pacing the borders
					of his imprisoned psyche, serving out a sentence both self-imposed
					and visited on him by a racist and dismissive society. Joe debases
					himself further in spurning the kindness and attention that his
					foster mother forces on him. After overturning the tray of food
					and throwing it in the corner, Joe’s hunger eventually outweighs
					his spite, and he is reduced to an animal, eating scraps from the
					floor.

