The defeated Confederate army abandons Atlanta and retreats south,
					leaving the city to the Yankees. Scarlett goes to the depot to find
					Dr. Meade and encounters a seemingly endless trail of dead and dying
					soldiers. Dr. Meade cannot leave them to help Melanie, and everyone
					else is evacuating the city. Melanie goes into labor, and Prissy
					admits to Scarlett that she lied when she claimed to know how to
					deliver a baby. For the first time in her life, Scarlett strikes
					a slave, slapping Prissy across the face. Scarlett hurries to try
					to help Melanie.

After a long, painful labor, Melanie gives birth to a
					boy. Atlanta is nearly deserted, but Scarlett sends Prissy to find
					Rhett and tell him to come help them escape to Tara.

Confederate soldiers confiscate Rhett’s horse and carriage,
					but he steals an old horse and cart and drives away with the women,
					Wade, and the baby. The retreating Confederate army has torched Atlanta’s
					foundries and storehouses to keep the Yankees from looting them.
					Scarlett feels unutterably grateful for Rhett’s strength and protection
					as they ride through the blazing streets. At last they make it out
					of Atlanta, and Scarlett repeats her desire to go to Tara. Rhett says
					that to do so would be suicidal, as the woods near Tara are full of
					Yankees. To Scarlett’s shock, Rhett announces that he is abandoning
					her to join the Confederate army. He kisses Scarlett passionately,
					overwhelming her with unfamiliar feelings. Her fury at his announcement
					quickly returns, though, and she slaps him. He walks away, and Scarlett
					takes the reins.

The next morning, Scarlett finds herself in pain after
					a long night of driving and sleeping in the woods. Melanie seems
					near death, and Scarlett whips the sickly horse back onto the road.
					Scarlett longs for the comfort of her mother and Tara. They pass
					the neighboring manors, all empty and burned, but find Tara still
					standing. Gerald greets Scarlett with the news that Ellen died the
					previous day. Scarlett’s sisters are still sick with typhoid fever.
					Gerald seems like a helpless old man, so Scarlett takes charge.
					Gerald tells her that the Yankees used Tara as a headquarters and
					have ravaged the plantation, stripping it of food. Dilcey recently
					gave birth, so she nurses Melanie’s child. Mammy seems to lack strength
					and confidence without Ellen, and Dilcey tells Scarlett that the
					Yankees have burned all the cotton and that Ellen died crying the
					name “Philippe.” Scarlett drinks some whiskey and sinks into despair.
					She remembers her proud family history and thinks of her ancestors
					who overcame hardships and won fortunes. Feeling strengthened by
					their example, Scarlett falls into a peaceful, drunken sleep.

Scarlett wakes in the morning with a headache. She realizes
					that Gerald, who seemed merely weary the previous night, is suffering from
					dementia and does not understand that Ellen is dead. Scarlett goes
					to Twelve Oaks to search for food and finds old turnips and cabbages.
					As she eyes the torched remains of the once-great plantation, she
					resolves to look forward rather than backward and vows to herself,
					“I’m never going to be hungry again.” The war soon fades from Scarlett’s
					mind as she devotes herself to feeding the hungry mouths at Tara,
					tending to the three sick girls, and struggling to stay afloat.
					Scarlett hardens and grows sharp-tongued under the strain and worry
					of being in charge, but she gains strength from her deep connection
					to Tara and her passion to hold on to the land.

Scarlett’s whiskey-induced flashback to her ancestors’
					struggles illustrates the power of the human will to overcome even
					the most severe adversity. Mitchell’s flashback technique, though
					less than subtle, reminds us that Scarlett’s situation is not unique
					and that she must fall back on the human capacity to meet unthinkable
					challenges. Other characters also exhibit strength of will and help
					guide Scarlett’s actions. As a child, Old Miss Fontaine witnessed
					the scalping of her entire family and survived. She recognizes the
					survival instinct in Scarlett and gives Scarlett advice based upon
					her own experiences. Rhett was thrown out of his house without a
					penny, but he manages to amass great wealth. Melanie gives birth
					almost unaided but never relinquishes her optimism. She exhibits
					incredible strength by doing hard work despite her physical weakness. Scarlett,
					Rhett, and Melanie could not be more different from one another,
					but they all possess wells of strength, and Mitchell celebrates
					their ability to survive the most difficult ordeals.

	When Rhett abandons Scarlett to join the Confederate
					Army, it marks a turning point for both of them. Rhett’s steadfastly
					anti-Southern exterior begins to crack, revealing that he may turn
					out to be a hero not just for the New South but for the Old South
					as well. Rhett’s brash anti-South rhetoric loses strength until
					finally he decides to join the Confederate army. Never the shining
					knight, however, Rhett performs his patriotic duty while leaving
					Scarlett in the dust to save herself and the lives of four others.
					Scarlett has only a horse, a carriage, and her own wits, and she
					has never driven a carriage before. However, she grits her teeth
					and maneuvers safely past soldiers of both camps who would gladly
					rob her of her horse. The long ride is harrowing, but Scarlett has
					changed so much that she can handle the difficulty. When she arrives
					at Tara, she finds herself caring for her demented father and the
					bewildered Mammy.

Scarlett would gladly give up her new responsibility and
					collapse into the arms of her mother, but Ellen has died. Scarlett
					cannot put down the burden that she never meant to pick up. In order
					to persevere, she adopts a mantra that returns throughout the novel:
					“I’ll think about it tomorrow.” Scarlett uses this phrase to explain
					and justify her decisions. She convinces herself that she must act
					without thinking about her actions or her plight. This mantra becomes
					her survival mechanism. When she feels she must do something unethical,
					she repeats her mantra and does what she must in order to protect
					Tara, her own life, and the lives of those people in her care. Ignoring
					her conscience comes easily to Scarlett. She routinely ignores her
					moral twinges when, for example, she reads Ashley’s letter to Melanie.
					Still, the acts she must now commit are not naughty but ruthless,
					and she often finds herself repeating her mantra during her difficult
					days at Tara.

	Gerald’s dementia results from the loss of Ellen, whom
					he loved dearly. His dementia symbolizes the inability of the Old
					South to recover and adjust after the Civil War. Gerald cannot run
					his plantation, comprehend the new order of things, or accept the
					loss of his wife and his way of life. He embodies the helpless state
					of the postwar South. Like many of his peers, he must rely on others
					to take care of him and make decisions for him. Scarlett takes loving
					charge of him, but other men in Gerald’s position find themselves
					at the mercy of opportunists from the North. Men like Gerald, who
					have known only the easy, good life of the Old South, find themselves bereft
					after the Civil War.

