At the beginning of A Doll’s House, Nora
seems completely happy. She responds affectionately to Torvald’s
teasing, speaks with excitement about the extra money his new job
will provide, and takes pleasure in the company of her children
and friends. She does not seem to mind her doll-like existence,
in which she is coddled, pampered, and patronized.

	As the play progresses, Nora reveals that she is not
just a “silly girl,” as Torvald calls her. That she understands
the business details related to the debt she incurred taking out
a loan to preserve Torvald’s health indicates that she is intelligent
and possesses capacities beyond mere wifehood. Her description of
her years of secret labor undertaken to pay off her debt shows her
fierce determination and ambition. Additionally, the fact that she
was willing to break the law in order to ensure Torvald’s health
shows her courage.

	Krogstad’s blackmail and the trauma that follows do not
change Nora’s nature; they open her eyes to her unfulfilled and
underappreciated potential. “I have been performing tricks for you,
Torvald,” she says during her climactic confrontation with him.
Nora comes to realize that in addition to her literal dancing and
singing tricks, she has been putting on a show throughout her marriage.
She has pretended to be someone she is not in order to fulfill the
role that Torvald, her father, and society at large have expected
of her.

Torvald’s severe and selfish reaction after learning of
Nora’s deception and forgery is the final catalyst for Nora’s awakening.
But even in the first act, Nora shows that she is not totally unaware
that her life is at odds with her true personality. She defies Torvald
in small yet meaningful ways—by eating macaroons and then lying
to him about it, for instance. She also swears, apparently just
for the pleasure she derives from minor rebellion against societal
standards. As the drama unfolds, and as Nora’s awareness of the
truth about her life grows, her need for rebellion escalates, culminating
in her walking out on her husband and children to find independence.

Take the Analysis of Major Characters Quick Quiz

