The revolutionaries are temporarily victorious, but their
					morale falls when they learn that the rest of the city has failed
					to join their uprising. The army prepares another attack on the
					barricade, prompting Enjolras to urge all revolutionaries who have
					wives and children to return to their families. Though the men refuse,
					Enjolras insists, and the group votes on which five men to send
					away. Enjolras, however, has only enough army uniforms for four
					men to slip out in disguise. Out of nowhere, Valjean appears and
					offers to give up his own uniform for the fifth man.

Valjean is a valiant fighter but makes a point of not
					killing any of the enemy. Enjolras expresses regret at taking lives,
					but he is willing to kill for his beliefs. When the revolutionaries
					run low on ammunition, Gavroche bravely scrambles over the barricade
					to gather ammunition from the bodies of dead army soldiers. He almost returns
					to the barricades unharmed, but at the last minute he is shot twice
					and dies. Realizing that the army is about to storm the barricade,
					Enjolras orders Javert’s execution, and Valjean eagerly volunteers.
					Once they are alone, however, Valjean tells Javert his address and
					sets him free. Valjean fires a shot in the air so the others will think
					that he has executed Javert. When he rejoins the group at the barricade,
					Marius looks at him with dread.

The revolutionaries can no longer stave off the attackers,
					so Enjolras orders a retreat. They fall back into the Corinth wine-shop. Marius
					is shot, but Valjean catches him as he falls and carries him off.
					When the troops enter the wine-shop, they find only Enjolras. He
					is executed as the army hunts down and kills the remaining revolutionaries.
					Valjean, with the unconscious Marius slung over his shoulders, searches
					for an escape. All exits are sealed and the troops are fast approaching.
					Luckily, Valjean discovers a sewer grate and carries Marius down
					into the sewers with him.

The narrator bemoans the fact that Paris spends huge sums
					collecting bird droppings for fertilizer while washing out all the
					human waste that could serve the same purpose. We learn that the
					Paris sewers were once nightmarish places and are told of the great
					flood in 1802, which covered large parts
					of the city with waste and filth. A man named Bruneseau began an
					extensive redesign of the sewers. The work was finished years later,
					after a cholera outbreak.

It is clear that Marius desperately needs a doctor. Valjean
					can barely see in the darkness of the filthy sewers, but his instincts
					guide him toward the river Seine, and he rushes ahead to bring Marius
					to safety. Avoiding police patrols and fighting fatigue and hunger,
					Valjean finally stumbles upon an exit. To his dismay, he finds that
					the gate is locked and cannot be forced open. Thénardier appears
					out of the darkness, demanding money in exchange for opening the
					gate. Thénardier does not recognize Valjean and assumes he is merely
					a criminal who has killed a wealthy man. Marius has no money, and Valjean
					is carrying only a paltry sum. Thénardier reluctantly takes the
					money and opens the gate. He also rips off a piece of Marius’s jacket
					so that he can later identify Valjean’s victim.

Valjean emerges on the banks of the Seine, but his freedom
					is short-lived. Javert, who has been chasing Thénardier, is waiting
					at the sewer entrance. Valjean is so covered in mud and slime that
					Javert does not recognize him, but Valjean turns himself in anyway. Valjean
					begs Javert to let him return Marius, who is dying, to his grandfather.
					Javert agrees and takes them to Gillenormand’s house. After Valjean
					and Javert drop off the wounded Marius at Gillenormand’s house,
					Valjean asks Javert for one more favor: he wants to see Cosette
					one last time. Again, Javert agrees to Valjean’s request. Valjean
					goes up the stairs to see his adopted daughter with a heavy heart,
					but when he looks out the window, he is surprised to see that Javert
					is gone.

Valjean’s offer to execute Javert for the revolutionaries
					turns out to be a gesture of compassion and concern, and befuddles
					the hard-hearted Javert. When Valjean brings Javert into the empty
					courtyard, Javert thinks that Valjean is finally going to punish
					him for his years of obsessive pursuit. It turns out, however, that
					not only does Valjean have no intention of executing Javert, but
					he also goes out of his way to save his tormentor’s life. By faking
					Javert’s execution, Valjean ensures that no one else kills the inspector.
					Javert is floored by Valjean’s inherent goodness, and his belief
					in his cause starts to waver. Unlike before, when Valjean has to
					beg Javert to let him retrieve Cosette in Montreuil, Javert now
					allows Valjean one favor, permitting him to bring Marius back to
					his grandfather’s. Valjean acts the part of Javert’s executioner
					almost too well, and there is an important moment of foreshadowing
					when Marius recoils from Valjean in horror. As far as Marius can
					tell, Valjean is a murderer, and as long as Marius remains unaware
					that Valjean has saved both his and Javert’s lives, he does not
					change his opinion.

Valjean arrives at the barricade just in time to save
					one unnamed man from certain death, a moment strongly reminiscent
					of his salvation of Cosette in the woods outside the Thénardiers’
					inn. This episode at the barricade reinforces our perception of
					Valjean as a nearly providential figure who arrives when people
					need him most. Just as he seems to drop from the sky in answer to
					Cosette’s desperate plea for help, Valjean once again appears out
					of nowhere to come to the rescue of one of the five men chosen to
					sneak out of the barricade. In describing Valjean’s generosity,
					the narrator writes that “[a] fifth uniform dropped, as if from
					heaven, onto the four others.” Phrased in these terms, Valjean’s
					uniform is like the giant hand that helps the young Cosette with
					her pail of water, a vehicle sent from heaven to help the unfortunate.
					Valjean’s criminal past, which has taught him to slip in and out
					of places unnoticed, contributes to his otherworldly air and turns
					him into a deus ex machina, a literary device in which
					a character or event unexpectedly swoops in to resolve a difficult
					situation. The deus ex machina is a device commonly
					used in drama, and Hugo’s use of it here highlights the impact of
					his theatrical background on his novel. It also reveals Hugo’s enormous
					faith in his protagonist: Valjean is so decent and good that the
					rules of the everyday world no longer apply to him. Indeed, his
					helpful appearances are worthy of an angel.

