Frédéric and Rosanette settle into a cozy domestic life.
					Frédéric believes she looks different, but he cannot pinpoint why.
					He learns that Arnoux is being taken advantage of by a woman from
					his factory, that his factory has closed down, and that he and Madame Arnoux
					are nearly estranged. Arnoux visits Frédéric one day and asks him
					to visit their home again. As Frédéric makes his way there, he runs
					into a man named Compain, who asks him cryptically if he’s a member
					of the “calf’s head.” When he arrives, Arnoux is not home. He renews
					his love for Madame Arnoux, and they kiss. Rosanette, who has followed
					him there, sees them. At home, Frédéric is so angry at her intrusion
					that he nearly hits her, but he stops when she reveals that she’s
					pregnant. Frédéric helps her pay off a debt to Mademoiselle Vatnaz,
					which she claims is the last owed.

Frédéric becomes annoyed by everything Rosanette does
					and more and more enchanted with Madame Dambreuse. He is bored by
					the conversation that goes on at her parties, but he vows to make her
					his mistress. He visits her frequently and flatters her constantly. One
					day, she gives in, and Frédéric feels like a new man, finally a
					true part of society. As he walks home, he runs into Deslauriers,
					who has been embroiled in controversy and has been shunned by both
					the Conservatives and the Socialists. Frédéric invites him to stay
					with him, and Deslauriers encourages Frédéric to run once again
					for the Assembly. Later, Frédéric attends his first dinner alone
					with Madame Dambreuse.

When he returns home to Rosanette, he is secretly happy
					at his deception.

Deslauriers visits Dambreuse and begins working for him.
					He is in touch with Monsieur Roque, and Frédéric instructs him to
					lie to Roque and Louise about why Frédéric is delaying marriage.
					He becomes more infatuated with Madame Dambreuse when he sees her
					among guests, knowing that he is more intimate with her than anyone
					else, and society accepts their affair. Madame Dambreuse wants a
					grand passion from Frédéric, but he soon tires of her gifts and
					affections. He still wants to raise his position in society through his
					liaison with her, but he no longer feels the same attraction.

Dambreuse falls ill and dies. Madame Dambreuse is unmoved and
					happily tells Frédéric that she is the heir to a great fortune.
					He asks why Dambreuse didn’t leave his fortune to Cecile, who is
					not his niece but his illegitimate daughter, and Madame Dambreuse insults
					her endlessly. She asks Frédéric to marry her, and he agrees. He
					then arranges the entire funeral.

The day after the funeral, Frédéric visits Madame Dambreuse and
					finds her panic-stricken. She cannot find a will that declares that she
					is the heir; all she and her lawyer can find is a will naming Cecile as
					the heir. Frédéric claims he will still marry her and promises that he
					will love her forever. He tells her he is going to Nogent to prepare for
					his candidacy.

Meanwhile, Rosanette has given birth to a son. Frédéric
					visits and guiltily spends several days with her at the maternity
					home. He gets a letter from Deslauriers telling him that there’s
					no longer any point in running for the Assembly. When he returns
					to Paris and Madame Dambreuse, she reads the letter and accuses
					him of not going to Nogent as he said he would; she had seen Deslauriers,
					who had been at Nogent for a reason unknown to Frédéric. He tells Madame
					Dambreuse he has been sick.

Frédéric begins living two lives: one with Madame Dambreuse and
					one with Rosanette. It turns into a game for him. But one day Madame
					Dambreuse gets an unsigned letter telling her that Frédéric is living
					with Rosanette. She trusts him when he says it isn’t true. She asks
					if he goes to see Madame Arnoux anymore, and he says no. He realizes
					she knows all about his life while he doesn’t know much about hers.
					He begins to notice her flaws.

People in Paris have different political viewpoints but
					most agree about the need to decentralize the government. Courtesans
					begin hosting gatherings at their homes, which people view as neutral
					territory. Rosanette follows suit, and Frédéric moves them to a
					new house and buys new furnishings. Rosanette dreams of being a
					society lady, and Frédéric realizes she is hoping he will marry
					her. Although he is angry at the thought, he is still jealous about
					her old lovers, and he begins hating her.

Rosanette attempts to pay the rest of her debts to Mademoiselle Vatnaz
					before the latter takes her possessions, but she cannot come up
					with the funds. Maître Athanase Gautherot, a process server, comes
					to claim the money and asks for the paintings. Frédéric intervenes,
					sends the collector away, and vows to find some money. Rosanette
					tries to cash in some shares Arnoux had promised her, but they are
					worthless, which infuriates Rosanette. Frédéric vows to see Arnoux.

Frédéric visits Regimbart, who tells him Arnoux sells
					religious objects. But when he finds the shop, he spots Madame Arnoux
					and flees. Rosanette is angry and decides to sue Arnoux. But Maitre Gautherot’s
					collector comes to the house, drunk, and tells them the sale of
					possessions must go forward. However, he accepts a few francs to
					tear the corners off the notice he had posted on the door, a notice
					that named Rosanette. Rosanette is stunned by Mademoiselle Vatnaz’s
					hatred.

Mademoiselle Vatnaz had met Dussardier when she worked
					in a business house. Dussardier had covered up her thieving ways,
					and she fell in love with him. She gave up everything for him, including her
					political diatribes, and asked him to marry her, but he said no. He
					finds out about her actions against Rosanette and asks her to drop
					them, but she refuses. Dussardier leaves her and tries to apologize
					for her actions to Frédéric. Dussardier claims that he is unhappy now
					that the revolution is over and things have gotten worse, not better.

Rosanette loses her case against Arnoux, but Deslauriers
					is certain she can win on a different charge. He recommends her
					case to Senecal. Deslauriers goes to Nogent, claiming that he is
					going to buy a law practice, and spends the summer with Roque. He
					begins angling to win over Louise. He tells the Roques that Frédéric
					is in love with someone else and has a child. Madame Moreau learns about
					Frédéric’s impending marriage to Madame Dambreuse.

Rosanette loses her case, but Deslauriers helps her wins
					her case against Arnoux, thanks to Senecal. When Frédéric goes into
					her room to congratulate her, she points out the baby, who is very
					sick. The baby dies. Frédéric hires Pellerin to paint a portrait
					of the dead child. While he paints, Pellerin reveals that Arnoux,
					because he is now poorer than ever thanks to Rosanette’s lawsuit,
					is leaving Paris with his family unless he can procure twelve thousand
					francs. Frédéric rushes out of the house.

As Frédéric struggles to make a place for himself in society,
					he makes significant advances in his relationships with Madame Arnoux, Rosanette,
					and Madame Dambreuse, but all three women begin to overlap and interfere
					with one another’s relationships, albeit unwittingly. He encounters
					Madame Arnoux once again, declares his love for her, and they kiss—only
					to be interrupted by Rosanette. His happy domestic life with Rosanette
					takes an unexpected turn when he finds out she is pregnant, and
					his fantasies about a baby with Madame Arnoux prompt him to agree
					to keep the child. Madame Dambreuse, his newest conquest, brings
					him further into bourgeois society; but Frédéric fakes his feelings
					for her by telling her things he’d dreamed of telling Madame Arnoux.
					He vows to marry Madame Dambreuse, but he is pulled back to Rosanette
					when their baby dies, and then back to Madame Arnoux when he learns
					she may be leaving Paris. Although Frédéric takes pleasure in juggling his
					affairs, the demands each woman makes on him are growing more intense,
					and the stakes are getting greater.

Frédéric pursues each of his three lovers for a different
					reason, and the unique needs each woman meets contribute to his
					inability to choose among them. Rosanette provides a comfortable
					home life that Frédéric settles into happily, her beauty and sparkling
					personality a welcome relief from the intense political talk of
					the people who surround him. Madame Arnoux, though long absent,
					fuels his romantic imagination—nearly every desire he has for another woman
					is rooted in his desire for her. She is older than Frédéric and serves
					as a stable, consistent figure, even as their relationship becomes
					more fraught. Madame Dambreuse provides the most explicit service:
					she is his ticket into high society, and the stakes are greatest
					in his affair with her. Rosanette grows to be a nuisance and Madame
					Arnoux continues to be troubling, but Frédéric will lose little
					from casting them aside. However, the life he desires is contingent
					on Madame Dambreuse’s continued affection. As has proven to be his
					pattern, Frédéric loses interest in Madame Dambreuse as soon as
					he conquers her, but in this case he must persevere. When he rushes
					to pursue Madame Arnoux, he is literally risking his future.

Dussardier, a loyal friend to Frédéric and once an energetic
					supporter of the revolution, has become disheartened and depressed
					at the turn France has taken, and his disillusionment in many ways mirrors
					Frédéric’s. The working class is worse off than ever before, and
					the bourgeoisie is determined to restore a single power to government.
					The Republic is floundering, and Dussardier has lost his faith in
					the workers. It has all been a great disappointment. Frédéric has
					faced his own disappointments: Rosanette is flirting with financial
					ruin, and Madame Dambreuse received nothing after her husband’s
					death. His kiss with Madame Arnoux resulted in nothing. Soon after
					he speaks with Dussardier, his child will die and he will learn
					that Madame Arnoux is nearly out of his life forever. French society
					has been disappointed and disillusioned, and these social unrests
					are mirrored on a personal level in Frédéric’s own life.

Just as Deslauriers once tried to win over Madame Arnoux
					in an attempt to take over Frédéric’s life, he now tries to win
					over Louise. His efforts to become like Frédéric are explicit, and
					he imitates Frédéric’s manner and speech. This rather creepy appropriation
					of someone else’s life wins him Louise’s confidence. Although Frédéric no
					longer seems intent on marrying Louise, Deslauriers’s attempts to
					woo her are still a betrayal, and we wonder what Deslauriers is
					up to as he ingratiates himself to the wealthy Roque.

