The cunning leader of the Dregs gang and Inej’s love interest. Kaz is singularly fixated on settling the score with Van Eck, who double-crossed him and kidnapped Inej. Though his plans are repeatedly thwarted, he always has another scheme up his sleeve and is eventually victorious. Serious, lethal, and emotionally tortured, Kaz is difficult for his compatriots to read and often seems to feel nothing but cold anger. He pushes himself to be vulnerable with Inej, however, and is fond of the rest of the gang.

A former Suli acrobat and Kaz’s most trusted confidant among the Dregs. When Inej is kidnapped and held hostage, she must grapple with her greatest fears as she tries to escape and awaits Kaz’s rescue. Strong, meditative, and brave, Inej’s goal is to get the money Van Eck owes the gang and then buy a ship to exact revenge on slavers, like those that stole her from her family as a girl. Though Kaz and Inej’s relationship is complicated by their various traumas, they make strides toward emotional intimacy across the novel.

Jan Van Eck’s estranged son and a talented musician, chemist, and explosives expert. Wylan’s father, Van Eck, tries to kill him because he can’t read, and Wylan discovers that, contrary to the story his father had told, his mother is alive, held captive in an asylum. Serious and clever, but filled with self-doubt, Wylan comes to recognize his talents, especially once he understands his father’s evil. He eventually gains control of his father’s estate. As he becomes more confident, he is able to express his feelings to Jesper.

Expert marksman of the Dregs, untrained Grisha Fabrikator, and Wylan’s love interest. Jesper is ashamed of his gambling addiction and the fact that he lost his father’s farm at cards. He also struggles because he blames himself for Inej’s capture by Van Eck. Full of humor and restless energy, Jesper is eager to get back into Kaz’s and his father’s good graces and to win Wylan’s heart.

A Ravkan Grisha overcoming parem addiction, a member of the Dregs, and Matthias’s love interest. Because of parem, Nina has lost her Corporalnik powers, which usually allow her to manipulate human bodies, but she discovers that she has the inverse ability to control the dead. Pleasure-seeking and warm, Nina also struggles with addiction. She ends the novel in mourning after Matthias is senselessly killed.

A former Fjerdan drüskelle who is now devoted to protecting Nina. Self-serious and flummoxed by Nina’s attempts to seduce him, Matthias has in many ways replaced his love of Fjerda with his love for Nina. Strong and often scowling, Mattias is a gifted military strategist. He dies when a young drüskelle takes revenge on him for abandoning his country.

A Grisha Inferni, Shu defector, and budding scientist. Many powerful nations vie for control over Kuwei because they believe he holds the secret to manufacturing parem. Kuwei, meanwhile, is devoted to creating an antidote for the drug and to putting an end to its ravages.

Merchant Councilman, shipping magnate, Alys’s husband, and Kaz’s enemy. In his eagerness to control parem, Van Eck double-crosses Kaz and is relentless in his efforts to capture Kuwei. He’s filled with pride about the impending birth of a new heir who will supplant Wylan, whose disability disgusts Van Eck. Arrogant, moralizing, and hypocritical, Van Eck believes in his own version of justice and gets his well-deserved comeuppance when the other merchants turn on him, jailing him for fraud.

Head of the Dime Lions who teams up with Van Eck and the swindler responsible for the death of Kaz’s brother. Dishonest and self-serving, Pekka Rollins repeatedly bests Kaz. Yet Kaz emerges victorious in the end when he exacts revenge on Rollins by making him think his son’s life is in jeopardy. In fear, Rollins flees Ketterdam for good.

The ostensible leader of the Dregs. Kaz outsmarts and overpowers him, winning control of the gang.

Jesper’s father and a salt-of-the-earth farmer. Colm is an honest man who loves his son, and he aids the gang in their revenge plot against Van Eck by posing as the rich leader of a jurda consortium.

Van Eck’s wife. Alys is pregnant with Van Eck’s heir. Silly, young, and vague, Alys is interested in her pets, music, and her music teacher Bajan.

An assassin sent by Van Eck to kill Inej. Also known as the White Blade, Dunyasha is cunning, skillful, and relentless. 

Van Eck’s lawyer and property manager. Ethically a better man than his clients, Smeet likes to gamble and flirt, but doesn’t cheat at cards or on his wife. He keeps secrets for many powerful people in Ketterdam.

A renowned Tailor, Nina’s former instructor, and member of the powerful Grisha Triumvirate.

A legendary Squaller, Nina’s former mentor, and another member of the powerful Grisha Triumvirate.

Privateer persona of King Nikolai Lantsov of Ravka.

A Suli musician, Alys’s music teacher, and Inej’s jailor for Van Eck. Bajan is indentured to Van Eck.

Wylan’s mother. Long believed to be dead, Marya instead had been committed to an asylum by her husband, Van Eck. At the end of the novel, Wylan saves her and they live together in the Van Eck mansion with Jesper.

Members of the Dregs and important allies for the gang.

A Grisha Squaller who is indentured to Councilman Hoede’s estate. He is captured by a flying Shu warrior, who has been tailored and altered by Fabrikators to have wings.

