Although The Scarlet Letter is about
Hester Prynne, the book is not so much a consideration of her innate
character as it is an examination of the forces that shape her and
the transformations those forces effect. We know very little about
Hester prior to her affair with Dimmesdale and her resultant public
shaming. We read that she married Chillingworth although she did
not love him, but we never fully understand why. The early chapters
of the book suggest that, prior to her marriage, Hester
was a strong-willed and impetuous young woman—she remembers her
parents as loving guides who frequently had to restrain her incautious
behavior. The fact that she has an affair also suggests that she
once had a passionate nature.

But it is what happens after Hester’s affair that makes
her into the woman with whom the reader is familiar. Shamed and
alienated from the rest of the community, Hester becomes contemplative.
She speculates on human nature, social organization, and larger
moral questions. Hester’s tribulations also lead her to be stoic
and a freethinker. Although the narrator pretends to disapprove
of Hester’s independent philosophizing, his tone indicates that
he secretly admires her independence and her ideas.

Hester also becomes a kind of compassionate maternal figure
as a result of her experiences. Hester moderates her tendency to
be rash, for she knows that such behavior could cause her to lose
her daughter, Pearl. Hester is also maternal with respect to society:
she cares for the poor and brings them food and clothing. By the
novel’s end, Hester has become a protofeminist mother figure to
the women of the community. The shame attached to her scarlet letter
is long gone. Women recognize that her punishment stemmed in part
from the town fathers’ sexism, and they come to Hester seeking shelter from
the sexist forces under which they themselves suffer. Throughout The
Scarlet Letter Hester is portrayed as an intelligent, capable, but
not necessarily extraordinary woman. It is the extraordinary circumstances
shaping her that make her such an important figure.

Take the Analysis of Major Characters Quick Quiz

