Virginia’s sister Vanessa Bell shows up early for tea.
					When she arrives, Virginia is in the study helping Leonard with
					proofs. Caught off-guard, Virginia feels embarrassed that she is
					not dressed better. Vanessa does not apologize for arriving early,
					and Virginia believes that her sister has a normal way of relating
					to the world that she feels incapable of mastering. Vanessa’s three
					children—Julian, Quentin, and Angelica—play in the garden. They
					have discovered a dying bird on the ground and have begun constructing
					a bed of grass surrounded by roses for the bird. Angelica, who is
					five, is in charge of making the grave bed. As soon as she lays
					the bird in the grave, Angelica wanders off in search of the nest. 

The children go inside, but Virginia remains in the garden
					to think about the bird. She thinks that she would like to lie down
					in the grave bed in the bird’s place. As she looks at the bird,
					she realizes that her literary creation Clarissa should not kill
					herself but should instead function as the symbolic bed of grass
					in which death is lain. 

The doorbell rings as Clarissa Vaughn prepares for the
					party that night for Richard. Louis, Richard’s former lover, surprises
					Clarissa. The two have not seen each other for five years, and Louis
					is immediately struck by how much older Clarissa looks. They reminisce about
					the summer at Wellfleet, and Clarissa tells him that she wants her
					ashes spread there when she dies. Louis responds that he hated her
					that summer because he was jealous of her relationship with Richard.

Louis is now a drama teacher in San Francisco, and although
					he wants to move back to New York, he has fallen in love with one
					of his students. Clarissa thinks that Louis’s love affair with a
					much younger student is ridiculous, but she envies the idea of being
					with a new young lover. Louis suddenly tears up and admits that
					he doesn’t love the student. Clarissa tries to comfort him as she
					thinks about the fact that she and Sally have never fought. The
					prospect of doomed love seems strangely attractive in the face of
					the comfortable familiarity of her romance. 

Clarissa’s daughter, Julia, shows up and greets Louis,
					who makes his exit after promising to come to the party. As he leaves,
					he remembers breaking up with Richard after a fight in a train station
					in Rome. After storming away, he jumped on the first train he saw
					and felt liberated by the experience of having no obligations or
					commitments. He remembers that as he sat on that train bound for
					Madrid, he could finally feel the happiness of his own soul. 

Vanessa has a casual confidence that draws attention to
					Virginia’s anxiety. Though the two women are sisters, their personalities
					are dramatically different. Vanessa’s assured manner makes Virginia’s obsessive
					observation of the world seem oppressive by contrast. All of the
					women in the book constantly evaluate every detail of the world
					around them, but each knows another woman who doesn’t share her
					powers of observation. In The Hours, the capacity
					for intense scrutiny seems to be necessarily accompanied by feelings
					of frustration and dissatisfaction. While Virginia, Clarissa, and
					Laura sometimes feel overwhelmed by their experiences of the world around
					them, Vanessa, Sally, and Kitty provide a contrast of confidence
					and normalcy. 

Virginia has an epiphany about death when she looks at
					the dying bird. The bird looks small and helpless cradled in the
					nest the children have built. Virginia realizes that she longs for
					death but that her character may not have the same longing. The
					moment with the bird also calls attention to Virginia’s relationship
					with Angelica. Although they share a small connection as they talk
					about the bird, Virginia realizes that her perspective is dramatically
					different from a child’s. She feels completely detached from the
					role of a mother, even though she views Vanessa’s children as miraculous.

Louis enters as an outside observer of Clarissa Vaughn’s
					established domestic life, and his unstable love life contrasts
					with the grounded relationships that Clarissa has formed. When he
					first arrives, he notices how much she has aged. In an echo of Leonard Woolf’s
					observation about Virginia, he notices that the forces of time have
					started to act upon Clarissa’s face, but the change seems sudden.
					Clarissa’s preoccupation with mortality comes not only from her
					thought process but perhaps also from her body, which has suddenly
					started to decline. 

Louis is desperate to be in love but doesn’t really understand what
					love is. He comes off as foolish and a bit desperate, because he presents
					himself as being in love even though he knows that he isn’t. Although
					he enjoys the idea of being in love, his desire from freedom and
					independence prevent him from ever being tied down in a relationship.
					The rush of exhilaration he experienced when he left Richard shows
					his need to escape the pressures of intimacy. By having a relationship
					with a much younger student, he avoids having to accept the responsibilities
					and compromises that come with an adult relationship. Though Clarissa
					has found comfort and stability in her family, she finds Louis’s
					independence and freedom to have relationships with whomever he
					chooses enticing. Despite the fact that she thinks the relationship
					won’t last very long, the idea of a casual romantic fling beguiles
					her. 

