Rayona decides that she wants to leave the reservation.
					She takes a day off from school to plan out exactly what she is
					going to do. Before the day is even half over, however, Father Tom
					shows up at Rayona’s house. She tells Father Tom she is planning
					to leave, and though he humors her at first, Rayona quickly recognizes
					he will try to change her mind. She decides it will be easier if
					she just goes to school. Father Tom invites her to an event called
					the Teens for Christ Jamboree, and Rayona decides to go, if only
					as a way of getting off of the reservation. The day they leave,
					Father Tom brings Rayona by Aunt Ida’s house to pack. Aunt Ida is
					not there, but Rayona can tell that Christine has stopped by recently
					because a package that had arrived for Christine is gone, along
					with some things from her room. Feeling even more rejected by her
					mother, Rayona packs all her belongings in a plastic bag. She also
					takes the tapes from Village Video.

	On the way to the jamboree, Father Tom asks Rayona about
					her family. She claims that her mother is dead and that her father
					is a pilot. Father Tom says that he never had a father either. Rayona points
					out that she does in fact have a father and asks Father Tom why
					he joined the priesthood. He says it was because he heard his calling
					to be “God’s helper.” Rayona falls asleep as they ride late into
					the night.

	When Rayona wakes, they are at the same gas station where
					she and her mother stopped on their way to the reservation. Father
					Tom explains that they are a day early to the jamboree and that
					they will have a chance to relax. They get to a campsite at Bearpaw
					Lake State Park and sit down for a picnic. Father Tom cannot get
					the grill started, so he suggests they go for a swim instead. When
					they arrive at the lake, Father Tom decides the water is too cold,
					but Rayona sees some people swimming out beyond a yellow raft and
					jumps in. When she reaches the raft, Father Tom jumps in after her,
					but cramps up before he can reach her. Rayona jumps back into the water
					and saves him. After Rayona drags Father Tom onto the dock, he draws
					her close to him. They embrace, Father Tom “duck[s] his head,” and
					his “hips jerk against” Rayona. Then Father Tom pulls away and says
					that they have experienced “an occasion of sin.”

	Father Tom tells Rayona that they have to go back to
					the reservation and that they never should have left. He says that
					Rayona needs to find friends her own age and that people who see
					the two of them together constantly might misunderstand their relationship.
					Rayona says she is going back to Seattle, and Tom seems to like
					the idea. He gives Rayona money, finds out about a train for her,
					and tells her that he will let Aunt Ida know where she went. That
					night Father Tom drives Rayona to the train and gives her his touristy
					bead necklace, saying they will meet again and that she will be
					in his prayers. After Father Tom leaves, Rayona does not get on
					the train and throws the necklace onto the tracks. She sits down
					to think and wait out the night, “happy for no reason.”

In this chapter, Rayona breaks away from her old life
					of ostracism, and we see her severing the ties that bind her to
					the reservation one by one. Rayona keeps a close eye on the package
					addressed to Christine, and when the package disappears, it ruins
					Rayona’s last hope that Christine will eventually return for her.
					The package’s disappearance becomes the final evidence for Rayona
					that her mother has abandoned her, and when she decides that her
					mother truly does not want to have anything to do with her, a vital
					tie to her old life is broken. Instead, on the drive to the jamboree,
					Rayona begins to invent a new life for herself, one in which her
					mother is dead and her father pilots jets. Rayona’s fabrication
					of Christine’s death is symbolic of the new detachment of daughter
					from mother. The fact that Rayona says Christine is dead also shows
					that Rayona has a very real anger toward her mother for having abandoned
					her.

	The yellow raft in Bearpaw Lake is the raft of the novel’s
					title, and it becomes a symbol of the time and place where Rayona
					breaks her final ties to her old life at the reservation. The raft
					becomes the launching point for Rayona’s thoughts about the future,
					and Dorris revisits this image twice more when he relates Rayona’s
					travels and dreams of a new life.

	Rayona’s encounter with Father Tom at Bearpaw Lake spoils their
					relationship. After the incident, Father Tom becomes nervous and
					appears to want to rid himself of Rayona, reversing his earlier lectures
					on why she should remain on the reservation. Instead of being hurt
					by Father Tom’s eagerness to see her go, Rayona is glad, as the
					encounter with Father Tom has made her disillusioned with him and
					strengthened her resolve to go back to Seattle. Rayona does not
					leave for Seattle, however, and eventually decides to stay near the
					lake. She has broken free of virtually all association with her former
					life, as no one from her old life knows where she is. Now that she
					has gained this emotional distance from her old life, she no longer
					feels the need to create a physical distance from it.

Sitting by the train tracks, Rayona claims to be “happy
					for no reason,” but the reason for her happiness is more evident
					to us than it is to her. Now that Rayona has severed all ties to
					the life she has known for fifteen years, she is free to live, or
					imagine the life she wants to create, and her happiness comes from
					this freedom. Even though her ideal life is vague and has no outline
					or plan, she has still escaped into a new world in which she has
					control of her future and can create her own life.

