The orange of the golden carp appeared
						at the edge of the pond. As he came out of the darkness of the pond
						the sun caught his shiny scales and the light reflected orange and
						yellow and red.

When María’s youngest brother, Lucas Luna, is near death
					that summer after having fallen ill the previous winter, neither
					a Las Vegas doctor nor the local priest can cure him. When Pedro,
					Lucas’s brother, asks for Ultima’s help, he explains that Lucas
					saw the daughters of Tenorio Trementina dancing the Black Mass,
					a blasphemous satanic ritual. When Lucas challenged them with a
					cross made from two sticks, they fled the scene. Within the week,
					Lucas fell ill.

	Ultima says that she will need Antonio’s help to cure
					Lucas. Antonio states that he will be proud to assist a curandera.
					As they approach El Puerto, they see the horned day moon, the moon
					of the Lunas, between two dark mesas at the end of the valley. When Ultima
					arrives in El Puerto, she forbids the Lunas to kill the coyotes that
					will surround Prudencio’s home when she works her cure. When Ultima
					takes Antonio to confront Tenorio to warn him that his daughters
					must lift the curse or suffer the consequences, Tenorio makes the
					sign of the cross. Ultima declares that his daughters gathered Lucas’s
					hair for their curse after he came to Tenorio for a haircut. Tenorio
					denies her accusations and calls her a bruja, or witch.

	Ultima closes herself and Antonio in Lucas’s room. After
					she forces a mixture of kerosene, water, and herbs down Lucas’s
					throat, she asks Antonio if he is afraid, and Antonio says that
					he is not. She explains that the reason for his courage is that
					good is always stronger than evil. Antonio hears Ultima’s owl attacking
					the coyotes surrounding Prudencio’s home. Antonio enters a trance
					and finds that he cannot move or speak. When Lucas writhes in pain,
					Antonio feels pain as well. Ultima makes three clay dolls covered
					with wax and forces Lucas to take more medicine. Afterward, Antonio
					drifts to sleep. When he wakes, he vomits green bile. Ultima catches
					it in rags that she stores in a bag. Afterward, Antonio is able
					to keep down some atole, a gruel made of corn meal. Lucas screams
					in pain, vomiting a squirming mass of hair. When Lucas successfully
					eats a bowl of atole, Ultima declares the cure finished. The house
					fills with happy people, but some whisper the words bruja and hechicera (meaning
					“witch” or “sorceress”). Ultima burns the mass of hair and dirty
					linen in the grove where Lucas challenged Tenorio’s daughters.

Cico offers to take Antonio to see the golden carp. After
					confirming that Antonio has never fished for a carp, Cico asks Antonio
					if he believes the golden carp is a god. Crestfallen, Antonio replies
					that he cannot believe in any god except the god of his church because
					he is a Catholic. At Cico’s request, Antonio swears by the cross
					that he will never hunt or kill a carp. Afterward, Cico and Antonio
					visit Narciso’s garden, where they eat carrots. Cico explains that
					Narciso’s magic and an underground spring make the garden so lush. Narciso
					plants by the light of the moon.

	Antonio’s group of friends invites Antonio and Cico to
					play ball. Ernie claims that there is a witch living in Antonio’s
					house. Horse asks Antonio to do a magic trick for them. Angry at
					Ernie’s taunting, Antonio agrees. He vomits the carrot juice on
					the ground, frightening his friends. Cico and Antonio run to a hidden
					pond where the huge, beautiful golden carp makes its appearance.
					Cico explains that the carp lives in the Hidden Lakes, a place with
					a strange power like the presence of the river, but stronger and
					hungrier. A mermaid lives there, trying to lure men to their deaths.
					Cico warns Antonio never to go there alone.

	Cico explains that the golden carp prophesied that the
					weight of people’s sin would cause the land to sink and be swallowed
					by the underground lake beneath it. When Antonio replies that it
					is not fair to the men who don’t sin, Cico tells him that all men
					sin. The story saddens Antonio, and he feels burdened by the knowledge.
					When he returns home, he learns that Ultima already knows about
					the golden carp. She tells Antonio that he must find his own truths
					in adulthood. That night Antonio dreams about the conflicting beliefs
					he has encountered, as well as the conflict between his parents’
					wishes for him. Ultima tells Antonio and his parents that the water
					of the moon and the sea are the same water and that each family
					member is part of the same cycle.

Antonio’s friendship with Samuel initiates Antonio’s awareness
					of the conflicts in his own religion. The El Puerto priest’s inability
					to cure Lucas increases Antonio’s doubts. When Ultima successfully cures
					Lucas, Antonio comes to realize that Ultima’s spirituality is both
					valid and separate from the Catholic Church. Antonio’s realization
					that the church does not have the same kind of power as Ultima suggests
					to him that no single way of interpreting the world can ever comprehend
					everything; life requires a commingling of different perspectives,
					explanations, and beliefs.

	In various ways, Anaya symbolically links Antonio’s character
					to the power of healing, showing that Antonio himself may possess some
					of the spirituality that he admires in Ultima. Mexican folklore traditionally
					associates Antonio’s middle name, Juan, with mystical powers. People
					who are named Juan are said to have special powers to resist witchcraft.
					Anaya offers us a vivid description of Ultima’s cure, but he does
					not explain her power. Her power is mysterious—recognizing and honoring
					its existence is a matter of faith and spirituality.

	Part of Ultima’s authority in the community and in Antonio’s family
					comes from the fact that even though she is not a member of the
					Catholic Church, she rigorously follows a philosophy that highly
					values harmony and free will. She continually contrives to show
					Antonio how his radically different heritages can coexist harmoniously
					within him. When she asks Antonio to take part in the cure, for
					instance, she does so because she knows that he will incur a social
					cost for helping her, and she wants him to understand what is at
					stake. This respectful treatment indicates that Ultima believes that
					Antonio is ready to make independent decisions and accept consequences,
					the hallmark of adulthood.

	Antonio’s friends represent the collective social voice,
					as many people in the community feel that Ultima’s cure is witchcraft. Although
					Antonio maintains his individuality, he still has to deal with social
					prejudice. Ernie’s mean-spirited teasing is Antonio’s first real
					taste of this phenomenon and represents simply another obstacle
					on his path to wisdom and adulthood. Whereas Ultima is able to understand
					the multiplicity of life and the incompleteness of any one way of
					explaining it, Anaya shows that many people are prejudiced by their
					own views and react to other views with suspicion and fear.

	The inability to look past biased assumptions is especially
					visible in the townspeople’s treatment of Narciso. Most people simply
					view him as the town drunk, and only a few, like Cico, possess the
					perspective necessary to see that he is actually one of the magic
					people, like Ultima. Cico’s view that Narciso’s lush garden is drunk
					like Narciso illustrates his idea of tolerance and acceptance, ideals
					he generally shares with Ultima. Cico’s moral order does not condemn Narciso’s
					love of alcohol; instead, he has the ability to see beyond the blinders
					of social prejudice to see the good in Narciso’s magic, just as
					Antonio does with Ultima. His willingness to be open-minded brings
					him strength, but also a lot of conflict.

	Cico’s decision to share the golden carp’s apocalyptic
					prophecy with Antonio illustrates the connection between Cico’s
					religion and Catholicism: both are concerned with moral decadence.
					The prophecy depresses Antonio because he feels that it burdens
					him with responsibility, implying that all men sin. As Antonio’s
					dreams about his older brothers reveal, he shoulders a great deal
					of responsibility for the moral well-being of people close to him.
					However, Ultima reminds him that he should concentrate on his own
					fate. She acknowledges the conflict he experiences between the pagan
					religion and the Catholic Church, but she does not tell him what
					to believe or what to think. Unlike Antonio’s mother, she regards knowledge
					as the best and most important asset in decision-making.

	Antonio’s dream about the water of the moon and the water
					of the sea is a way for him to deal symbolically with the religious
					conflict between his parents. Gabriel’s spiritual beliefs are more
					like Cico’s pagan religion than like María’s Catholicism, and the
					result is even more tension between the parents. Antonio’s struggle
					to cope with competing moral orders is now a symbolic part of his
					struggle to cope with conflicting family traditions. Ultima, whose
					character demonstrates the possibility of the harmonious coexistence
					of opposites, calms Antonio’s fears in the dream by revealing the
					interdependent relationship of the sea and the moon, symbolic representations
					of his paternal and maternal traditions.

