In the fall, Reuven and Danny begin their final year of
					college. One day, Reuven makes what he thinks is an innocent joke
					about hearing silence. Danny responds that Reuven is being more
					insightful than he realizes. Danny explains that he has begun to
					hear silence—he listens to it and hears it talking to him. He also
					tells Reuven that he cannot start dating because a wife has already
					been chosen for him.

	Reuven attends Levi Saunders’s Bar Mitzvah in October.
					The next day, Levi becomes violently ill and is taken to the hospital. Reuven
					tells his father about Levi’s illness. He also reveals to his father
					that Danny is panicking about the illness because he has been relying
					on his brother to take over the dynasty. David Malter encourages
					Reuven to speak with Danny about how he plans to break this news
					to his father. David Malter also enigmatically reveals more about
					the custom of raising a child in silence, saying it is an old Hasidic
					tradition that is used to teach children compassion. But again,
					he refuses to give Reuven any specific information.

	The following week, when Danny tells Reuven that he is
					applying to Harvard, Berkeley, and Columbia for a fellowship in
					psychology, Reuven urges him to figure out how he will tell his
					father. Danny tries to brush aside Reuven’s concerns, but soon realizes
					that his father will inevitably see the mail from the schools to
					which he has applied. He becomes panicked, and Reuven urges Danny
					to come over and talk to David Malter. That evening, Reuven’s father cautions
					Danny that he must carefully consider all that his decision entails,
					including breaking off his pre-arranged marriage. He also warns
					Danny that he must thoughtfully plan exactly what he will say to
					Reb Saunders on the day of the confrontation. Before Danny leaves,
					David Malter asks him if he can, in fact, hear silence. Danny replies
					that he can, and asks Reuven’s father if he understands the way
					his father has raised him. David Malter refuses to explain the matter
					to either Danny or Reuven, saying it is a private matter between
					Danny and his father.

	Danny receives acceptance letters from all three schools
					he applied to. Though Reb Saunders has obviously seen the return addresses
					on the envelopes, he has not approached Danny about them. Danny
					decides to go to Columbia, but he is still too afraid to broach
					the subject with his father. While discussing his dilemma with Reuven,
					Danny mentions that Reb Saunders has been asking again why Reuven
					has not come over for a Shabbat Talmud session.

	In the months that follow, Reb Saunders, through Danny,
					continues to drop hints that he would like Reuven to come over some Shabbat
					afternoon. Because of his dislike for the rabbi, Reuven continues
					to ignore the requests. Later that spring, Danny tells Reuven that
					Reb Saunders has made the special request that Reuven come over
					on the first or second day of Passover. That night, Reuven tells his
					father that Reb Saunders has been asking to see him. David Malter
					becomes quite angry with his son, saying he should speak with Reb
					Saunders if Reb Saunders wishes him to do so. He points out that
					Reb Saunders wants to use Reuven to talk to Danny. Reuven quickly
					calls Danny and tells him he will come over the following Sunday,
					during Passover.

Reb Saunders’s silence continues to be the central mystery
					of The Chosen. Potok uses Reb Saunders’s silence
					as a literary device that allows us to empathize with both Reuven
					and Danny. By not explaining the meaning of Reb Saunders’s silence,
					the novel imposes a kind of silence on the reader. Because we are
					confused and frustrated about the meaning of silence, we can better
					understand Reuven and Danny’s frustration with Reb Saunders’s mysterious method
					of parenting.

There are many other instances of silence within the novel,
					which reinforce the complexity and subtlety of the relationship
					between silence and communication. When Danny reveals that he has learned
					to hear silence, he strengthens the idea of silence as a means of
					communication. Danny’s paradoxical statement perplexes Reuven, because
					it implies that a lack of sound need not entail a lack of knowledge
					and information. Danny’s statement shows us that silence is a complex
					concept, that it can have form and function, and that it can affect
					a person as much as words.

Furthermore, in this chapter, David Malter continues the
					silence he has been imposing on Reuven. Leaving Reuven bewildered,
					he again refuses to explain Reb Saunders’s behavior. At the end
					of the chapter, Reuven realizes that by refusing to visit the Saunders
					household, he himself has been imposing a silence upon Reb Saunders. Reuven
					has been preventing Reb Saunders from communicating with Danny the
					only way he is able to, through Reuven. 

	The conversation between Danny and David Malter at the Malter’s
					apartment is the first time since Reuven’s hospitalization that
					all three have had a conversation in the same room. This interaction
					disrupts the binary relationships that Potok has carefully set up
					over the course of the novel. Up to this point, David Malter and Reuven
					have been a pair, set in opposition to the other father-son pair,
					Danny and Reb Saunders. Danny and Reuven are also a pair, set in
					opposition to the figures of David Malter and Reb Saunders. Here,
					the boundaries between the pairs collapse as Danny—for the first
					time since Reuven’s hospitalization—talks directly with Reuven’s
					father. This collapse in the book’s boundaries foreshadows the crucial
					change that occurs in the following chapter, during the book’s climax.

	David Malter reveals a surprising facet of his character
					during his conversation with Danny. As he talks to Danny about silence,
					his response reflects astonishment at—perhaps even respect for—Danny’s
					ability. David Malter tells Danny that Danny’s father will want
					him to raise his own children in same way. David Malter’s response
					to Danny’s decision has a different tone than the disgust he displayed
					earlier, when he could not understand why the Hasidim felt like
					they had to carry the burdens of the world. As we shall see in the
					coming chapter, David Malter’s opinions of Hasidism are complex
					and differ from how they first appeared.

