The author and first-person narrator of Just Mercy. Stevenson’s childhood in a rural area of Delaware marked by poverty and segregation inspires him to address racial and economic inequality. A relentless advocate for his legal clients, Stevenson’s humanity and dedication to the pursuit of justice inspire hope in the inmates he represents and their families. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Bryan Stevenson

An African American resident of Monroeville, Alabama, who is wrongly convicted of murder and sentenced to death. Hard-working, independent, and well-liked, McMillian’s wrongful arrest and prosecution is the central case of Just Mercy. Through six years on death row, McMillian maintains his dignity and sense of humor, demonstrating his indomitable spirit.  

Read an in-depth analysis of Walter McMillian

A key witness in the prosecution’s case against Walter McMillian. Bearing burn scars as the result of a childhood accident, Myers is an illiterate outcast and drug user. He is easily manipulated into false accusations against McMillian because he is prone to exaggeration and enjoys getting the police’s attention. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Ralph Myers

A Vietnam veteran sentenced to death row. Richardson’s story describes the path from the military to prison for many combat veterans suffering from PTSD. His revelation of the helpfulness of those around him with his execution pending demonstrates the irony of a system and a society where help comes too late for those who need it most. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Herbert Richardson

The newly elected Sheriff of Monroe County. Driven by inexperience and public pressure for an arrest in the Morrison murder, Tate is not above obtaining false testimony through intimidation and bribery. He regularly uses racist language and tells McMillian that he should have been lynched. He uses fear as a tool to control McMillian and other Black residents.

The District Attorney of Monroe County who illegally withholds evidence during McMillian’s initial trial and conviction. With his retirement nearing, Pearson’s leading role in the wrongful prosecution reveals that his desire for a win overrides his commitment to truth and justice. 

The district attorney who replaces Ted Pearson after his retirement. Though he at first stands by McMillian’s conviction, he eventually compels a new investigation, suggesting his regard for the truth. Chapman’s admission that he learned from the case and his desire to shake Walter’s hand reveal his humility and humanity. 

A young white woman who initiates an affair with Walter McMillian. Their interracial romance results in town gossip and distrust of McMillian. Her divorce, custody case, and drug use lead to a friendship with Ralph Myers. Though Myers doesn’t know McMillian, he knows of him through Kelly, setting up his false accusation.

The judge for McMillian’s initial trial. Judge Key reveals his pre-trial bias by discouraging Stevenson from serving as attorney on the case and approving of a change of venue to a county with virtually no Black residents.

A young Black man known as a jailhouse informant. Hooks is willing to give false testimony against McMillian for his own benefit.

A Black man in his twenties who worked with Bill Hooks. When Houston comes forward to refute Hooks’s testimony against McMillian, Chapman files perjury charges against him. Houston stands as an example of a corrupt system using intimidation and oppression to suppress the truth.

The wife of Walter McMillian. Hospitable, patient, strong, and devoted to her family, Minnie believes in her husband’s innocence and advocates for his release. While she supports her husband in court, her decision that Walter not return home reveals the trauma the case and his infidelity have caused.

The 18-year-old daughter of a respected Monroeville family. The town’s desperation for an arrest and conviction following her murder combines with fear and racism to make Walter McMillian law enforcement’s target. 

The first death-row prisoner Bryan Stevenson meets during his internship with the Southern Prisoners Defense Committee. Henry’s humanity and hopefulness impact Stevenson’s commitment to a career serving death row inmates.

A thirteen-year-old boy convinced by two older teens to participate in a robbery. When the elderly homeowner is sexually assaulted later in the day, the older boys implicate Sullivan. Abused, neglected, and mentally disabled, Sullivan is tried as an adult and sent to prison. When he’s freed after nearly thirty years, he shows his gratitude by giving Stevenson five different Father’s Day cards.  

A thirteen-year-old boy who shoots a woman during an armed robbery with two older boys. Sentenced to life without parole in an adult prison, Manuel’s story demonstrates the inhumane practice of solitary confinement. His emotional phone call to his victim, Debbie Baigre, reveals his remorse, while her advocacy for Manuel’s release reveals a capacity for mercy.

The youngest of twelve children of an abusive father and sickly mother. Suffering from intellectual disabilities, she and a friend accidentally start a house fire that kills two boys. Garrett’s case highlights the issues of ineffective legal counsel, mandatory minimum sentencing, life sentences for juveniles, and sexual assault in the prison system.

A forty-three-year-old wife and doting mother from an impoverished area of rural Alabama. Her home delivery of a stillborn baby leads to capital murder charges, highlighting the legal bias against poor mothers, as well as the media and public obsession with dangerous mother stories. Her appearance at a dinner three months following her release from prison demonstrates hope realized due to the work of Stevenson and his colleagues.

The director of the Southern Prisoners Defense Committee. Bright is brilliant and dedicated. His passion for justice for death-row inmates inspires Stevenson’s work.

The co-founder, with Bryan Stevenson, of the organization that would become the Equal Justice Initiative. Described as fearless and smart, Ansley focuses on administrative and financial matters so that EJI can focus on its commitment to social justice.

