Ellen's grandmother is a wealthy, miserly woman who is
				unfailingly bitter and vengeful. Her only desires seem to be power,
				money, and revenge. Although she has seldom spoken to Ellen in her
				life, she battles for her custody, as she wants to get back at Ellen's
				father for the harm he has caused her daughter, Ellen's mother.
				While Ellen had still been living with her father, she had hired
				Rudolph and Ellis, Ellen's uncles on her father's side, to spy on
				them and report back to her on their activities. She is exceptionally
				underhanded and will do anything to get revenge on Ellen's father
				for his abuse of her daughter, though she does not seem to care
				that Ellen must suffer too. During Ellen's stay, she is vicious
				and cruel, constantly berating Ellen for the likeness she bears
				to her father, which, the novel's other characters imply, is not
				true. Mama's mama is evil to the core, and it seems the only satisfaction
				she gets is from treating Ellen like a servant, as she treats the
				black workers who labor on the acres of land she owns. Indeed, she
				does send Ellen to work the fields too.

Despite her cruelty, she is undoubtedly pathetic. This
				aspect of her character is especially clear as she becomes weakened
				by age and illness. She is pitiful prior to her illness because
				she can only garner enjoyment from the misery she causes others,
				and she is pathetic afterward because she must rely on Ellen to
				care for her, whom she has treated as a slave and not as her own
				granddaughter. However weak, she clings to her vendetta against
				Ellen's father and continues to abuse Ellen emotionally. Her emotional
				abuse of Ellen is so severe that she scars her permanently, causing
				her to dig into her psyche and question her self- worth. She is
				particularly abusive when she demands that Ellen not shed another
				tear for her father's death. This demand illustrates her general
				revulsion at the display of emotion, as it seems she has been sucked
				dry of love and caring.

