Humbert lists the many different names of his love: Dolores,
					Lo, Dolly, Lolita. He admits to being a murderer and states that
					he will present his case to the readers, whom he calls “his jury.”
					Humbert explains that Lolita was not the first girl-child in his
					life and refers to a particular girl he calls “exhibit number one.” 

Humbert begins his story from his birth in Paris and his
					childhood on the Riviera, where a frequently absent father and a
					kind, yet strict aunt raise him. His mother had died suddenly, and
					he describes this traumatic event with only two brief words: “picnic,
					lightning.” His father runs a luxurious hotel, and Humbert lives
					a healthy, happy childhood among the Riviera tourists. He states
					that his sexual education up until the age of thirteen has been
					sporadic and somewhat dreamlike, based on old French novels and
					movies. 

In the summer of 1923, Humbert meets a twelve-year-old
					girl named Annabel Leigh, who is traveling with her parents. Although Humbert
					and Annabel are initially just friends, that friendship soon changes
					into passionate, adolescent love. Humbert states that he doesn’t
					have as clear a picture of Annabel as he does of Lolita, though
					he lyrically recounts their awkward, fumbling attempts at sex. Annabel
					and Humbert never manage to consummate their love, and four months
					later she dies of typhus in Corfu. 

Humbert wonders if his predilection for young girls began
					with Annabel and claims that she and Lolita are somehow connected.
					He claims that his brief encounter with Annabel had physical and
					spiritual components that today’s children would never understand.
					He mourns the fact that he was never able to complete the sexual
					act with Annabel and describes one encounter in the mimosa grove where
					they came very close. He tells the reader that he was only able to
					break free of Annabel’s spell when he met Lolita, more than twenty
					years later.

Humbert discusses his college days, when he gave up the
					study of psychiatry for the study of English literature. Moderately
					successful, he publishes a few books. During this time, he visits
					many kinds of prostitutes but finds himself mostly drawn to a particular
					type of girl, the nymphet. A nymphet, according to Humbert, is a
					girl between the ages of nine and fourteen, not necessarily beautiful,
					but possessing an elusive, sexually appealing quality. He attributes
					this quality to a magic spell and makes references to historical
					and cultural instances of romance and marriage between underage
					girls and older men. He states that that the allure of the nymphet
					can only be understood by adult men who are at least thirty years
					older and who have the wisdom to understand the girls’ enchanting
					qualities. While Humbert spends his time watching nymphets in the
					playground, he rarely acts on his obsession. As an attractive man,
					Humbert finds himself with many adult female admirers. However,
					most of them repulse him. Humbert finds it unfair that a man can
					bed a girl of seventeen but not one of twelve.

John Ray, Jr., Ph.D., has already warned the reader of
					Humbert’s persuasiveness, and Humbert confirms this assessment by
					beginning his manuscript with a direct plea to the reader. The first
					chapter combines both elements that Ray commented upon: unrepentant lust
					for a girl-child and the elegant language of a man who is determined
					to tell the story from his own point of view. This emphasis on language
					sets most of Nabokov’s work apart from other novels of its time.
					In Lolita, Nabokov showcases the connections and
					individual beauty of words through word games, puns, and patterns.
					The reader soon becomes involved in the games and, as a result,
					involved in the narrative. This involvement occurs even though most
					readers are repulsed by the subject matter, pedophilia. Humbert
					relies on elegant language that will prove to be very persuasive,
					even though Humbert himself may not earn our sympathy and often
					acts monstrously.

Humbert describes his childhood as rather idyllic, and
					this description reveals many personality characteristics that make
					him unique among other characters in the novel. Most important,
					his background is European—not from any particular country, but from
					a mixture of nationalities. His European character and manner will
					prove irresistible to many Americans, and it sets up the American-European
					cultural conflict. Though Nabokov explicitly stated that this is
					not a novel of a jaded European seducing an innocent American or
					a shallow American seducing an elegant European, the contrast between
					the two cultures is highlighted prominently throughout the book.
					Humbert’s childhood, in other ways, is edenic and dreamy, far different
					from the childhood that Lolita will have. As the only son of a well-to-do
					father, Humbert is cultured and educated with high standards, and
					was raised among the elite vacationers on the Riviera. This privileged
					childhood is interrupted and forever marked by his encounter with
					Annabel Leigh.

The name Annabel Leigh is an allusion
					to Edgar Allan Poe’s poem “Annabel Lee,” an ode to a young wife.
					Critics generally assume that the poem refers to Poe’s young wife,
					who died tragically early in their marriage. There are multiple
					allusions to Poe throughout the novel, but none so overt as this.
					Annabel’s name indicates her status not only as a prepubescent lover
					and object of desire but also as a young life cut short. Even though
					Annabel predates Lolita, Humbert makes clear that his love for Lolita
					has blurred the memory of his earlier love. Humbert can’t recollect
					Annabel’s appearance exactly, but he provides a lyrical description
					of their attempts at lovemaking. This tendency will be reversed
					when it comes to Lolita, whose physical features receive long, evocative
					descriptions while her sexual encounters with Humbert are narrated
					ambiguously and obliquely. Though Humbert romanticizes his trysts
					with Annabel, he manages to provide detailed accounts of their failed sexual
					encounters. With Lolita, he is too far in love to provide anything
					so mundane.

Humbert’s concept of the nymphet recalls the nymphs of
					Greek mythology, who were beautiful, wild, sexually active, and
					seduced by gods and men alike. Thus, Humbert’s invented name for
					the category of girls he likes places a learned and romantic veneer
					over his deviant desires. The age range of nymphets is fixed, and
					Humbert has no use for the nymphets who grow into ordinary women,
					an unfortunate aversion. Many adult women in the novel are clearly attracted
					to Humbert, but he sees them only as obstacles and hindrances. Humbert
					also tries to make his love for nymphets timeless by linking it
					to the practices of historical figures and faraway cultures. His
					romanticization of his attraction to underage girls belies his half-hearted
					attempts to provide a dutiful psychiatric analysis of his tendencies.
					Throughout the novel, Humbert speaks of the “enchantment” and “spell”
					of his moments with Lolita and Annabel. The nymphet is a symbol
					of lost youth and pure love, a dream-girl, who, given her romantic
					qualities and the censure of society, is virtually unattainable
					to the adult man.

