When Anne Frank is given a diary for her thirteenth birthday,
				she immediately fills it with the details of her life: descriptions
				of her friends, boys who like her, and her classes at school. Anne
				finds comfort writing in her diary because she feels she has difficulty
				opening up to her friends and therefore has no true confidants.
				Anne also records her perceptions of herself. She does not think
				she is pretty, but she is confident that her personality and other
				good traits make up for it. Through her writing, Anne comes across
				as playful and comical but with a serious side.

Anne’s diary entries show from the outset that she is
				content and optimistic despite the threats and danger that her family
				faces. The tone and substance of her writing change considerably
				while she is in hiding. Anne is remarkably forthright and perceptive
				at the beginning of the diary, but as she leaves her normal childhood
				behind and enters the dire and unusual circumstances of the Holocaust,
				she becomes more introspective and thoughtful.

During her first year in the annex, Anne struggles with
				the adults, who constantly criticize her behavior and consider her
				“exasperating.” Anne feels extremely lonely and in need of kindness
				and affection, which she feels her mother is incapable of providing.
				She also wrestles with her inner self and considers what type of
				person she wants to become as she enters womanhood. Anne tries to
				understand her identity in the microcosm of the annex and attempts
				to understand the workings of the cruel world outside. As she matures, Anne
				comes to long not for female companionship, but intimacy with a
				male counterpart. She becomes infatuated with Peter, the van Daan’s
				teenage son, and comes to consider him a close friend, confidant,
				and eventually an object of romantic desire.

In her final diary entries, Anne is particularly lucid
				about the changes she has undergone, her ambitions, and how her
				experience is changing her. She has a clear perspective of how she
				has matured during their time in the annex, from an insolent and
				obstinate girl to a more emotionally independent young woman. Anne
				begins to think about her place in society as a woman, and her plans
				for overcoming the obstacles that have defeated the ambitions of
				women from previous generations, such as her mother. Anne continues
				to struggle with how she can be a good person when there are so
				many obstacles in her world. She writes eloquently about her confusion over
				her identify, raising the question of whether she will consider herself
				Dutch, as she hears that the Dutch have become anti-Semitic. Anne
				thinks philosophically about the nature of war and humanity and
				about her role as a young Jewish girl in a challenging world. From
				her diary, it is clear that she had the potential to become an engaging,
				challenging, and sophisticated writer.

