The fire was out, the clock went on ticking,
					and Emma vaguely wondered at this calm of all things while within herself
					there was such a tumult.

During the winter, the Bovarys often go to Homais’s house
					on Sunday evenings. Here, Emma and Leon develop a strong rapport.
					Each feels powerfully attracted to the other, but neither has the
					courage to admit to the feeling. They exchange little gifts, and
					the townspeople are sure they are lovers.

Emma watches Leon, Homais, and Charles and decides that
					her husband is so unremarkable that he disgusts her. She realizes
					that Leon loves her, and the next time they meet, they both are
					shy and awkward, unsure of how to proceed. Emma is constantly nervous, and
					she begins to lose weight. She fancies herself a martyr, unable
					to give herself to love because of the restrictions of her marriage.
					She plays the part of the dutiful wife to Charles and brings her
					daughter, Berthe, back home from the wet nurse. Soon, however, Emma’s desire
					for Leon becomes much stronger than her desire to be virtuous, and
					she gives way to self-pity. She breaks down in tears, and blames
					Charles for all of her unhappiness. One day, a shopkeeper named
					Monsieur Lheureux hints to her that he is a moneylender, in case
					she should ever need a loan.

Emma hears the church bells tolling and decides to seek
					help at the church. The curate, Abbé Bournisien, preoccupied with
					his own problems and with a group of unruly boys in his catechism
					class, is oblivious to Emma’s deep distress. Soon afterward, in
					a fit of irritability, Emma pushes Berthe away from her, and the
					little girl falls and cuts herself. Emma claims that Berthe was
					playing and that she fell accidentally. Emma is frantic and shaken,
					but Charles eventually calms her.

	Leon decides to go to Paris to study law. He loves Emma,
					but her sentiments make their romance impossible, and he is utterly
					bored in Yonville. He is also tempted by romantic adventures he
					suspects will await him in Paris. When he bids Emma farewell, they
					are both awkward and quiet, but they are both moved. After he leaves, Charles
					and Homais discuss the lures and difficulties of city life.

At the conclusion of Part Two, Chapter IV, we learn more
					about Leon’s feelings for Emma. We discover that he feels shame
					at his cowardice in not declaring his love for her, that he has
					written and torn-up a number of love letters, and that he feels
					frustration that Emma is married. The narrative then shifts to Emma,
					in contemplation of love:

Flaubert satirizes the romantic idea of love as an overwhelming transformative
					force of nature by juxtaposing images of hurricanes and tempests
					with one of the more mundane effects of weather, water damage. By
					presenting her discovery of the dent in the wall in an ironic tone
					of regret, he mocks Emma’s lack of practical knowledge, as well
					as her inability and unwillingness to conceive of the actual. Emma’s
					conflict is contained in this passage. She yearns for unreal romantic
					ideals and is at first ignorant of and then disappointed by the
					imperfect realities of life, such as decay.

	Emma’s struggle with her conscience, as she tries to
					do her best to become a dutiful wife and mother even as she is tempted
					by a romance with Leon, ultimately amounts to her indulgence of
					the romantic role of the martyr. But when she shoves her infant
					daughter away from her in a fit of annoyance, she can no longer
					pretend to be a dutiful family woman. She is saved from an infidelity
					with Leon only by his decision to leave for Paris. The incident
					with Berthe demonstrates Emma’s inability to embrace maternal instincts.
					Just before she pushes her daughter, she stares at her with disgust, regarding
					her more as a foreign object—a piece of furniture or an animal—than
					as her own child.

	The conversation between Emma and the priest offers Flaubert
					a chance to poke fun at the superficial nature of religion among
					the bourgeoisie. When Emma turns to the priest, she is in real need
					of help. But the Abbé Bournisien is preoccupied not with spiritual
					matters but with petty banalities: the rowdiness of his pupils and
					his daily rounds. When Emma says, “I am suffering,” he misunderstands
					her, and assumes that she is referring to the summer heat. The scene
					is humorous, but it also criticizes the church sharply, implying that
					it can only provide surface comforts and cannot minister to Emma’s
					very real spiritual need.


	Madame Bovary became so famous in part
					because of its innovative narrative technique. Flaubert matches
					his prose style to his narrative subject with remarkable accuracy.
					When Emma is bored, the text seems to crawl; when she is engaged,
					it flies. Flaubert widens the symbolic reach of his novel with the
					development of Homais, a character perfectly conceived to represent
					all that Flaubert hates about the new bourgeoisie. And he introduces
					foreshadowing when the sinister Lheureux hints to Emma that he is
					a moneylender.

