Two days later, the armies of the West set out for Mordor,
					numbering seven thousand. At Imrahil’s urging, a small force remains
					in Minas Tirith to defend the city. Though the injured Merry cannot
					go to battle, Pippin marches as a soldier of Gondor. The army passes Osgiliath
					and makes camp; the horsemen move ahead, but they encounter no opposing
					forces. As the army draws closer to Mordor, Gandalf instructs the
					heralds to sound the trumpets and declare the coming of the King
					of Gondor. The army’s stirring and brazen cheers meet little answer
					from Sauron aside from an eerie, watchful silence.

On the second day of its march, the army is nearly ambushed
					by a strong force of Orcs, but Aragorn and the Captains stop the ambush.
					Several Nazgûl begin to fly overhead, following the progress of
					the army. As Aragorn’s army nears Mordor on the fourth day, the
					younger troops become paralyzed with fear. In pity, Aragorn permits
					them to turn back, but many decide to stay. On the sixth day, the
					host approaches Morannon, the Black Gate of Mordor, which is surrounded
					by reeking pools of mud and filth. Aragorn arranges his army upon
					two great hills.

Gandalf and Aragorn ride toward Morannon with a small
					envoy, including Gimli, Legolas, Pippin, Éomer, Imrahil, and Elrond’s sons—representatives
					of each of the races of Middle-earth that are opposed to Sauron.
					The envoy calls for Sauron to emerge and submit to the justice of
					Gondor. After a long period of silence, the Lieutenant of the Dark
					Tower emerges with an embassy of black-clad soldiers. Although a
					living man, the Lieutenant has a face like a skull, and fire burns
					in his eye sockets and nostrils.

The Lieutenant laughingly mocks Aragorn and his army.
					When Gandalf admonishes him, the Lieutenant draws from his cloak Frodo’s
					coat of mithril, Sam’s sword, and a gray Elven
					cloak. The Lieutenant informs the anxious Captains that Sauron will
					spare the life of the captured Hobbit spy if they agree to certain
					terms. Gandalf, with a look of defeat, asks for the terms. The Lieutenant
					says that Gondor and its allies must never attack Mordor, that Gondor must
					become a tributary to Mordor, and that a suitable captain from Mordor
					must rule in Isengard over Rohan. Gandalf utterly rejects these
					terms.

The Lieutenant feels a sudden grip of terror at Gandalf’s
					rebuke. He turns and retreats to the Black Gate. As he does, the
					host of Mordor—much larger than that of Gondor—pours out of the
					Gate. Drums roll, fires blaze, and the sun turns red. A great company
					of brutal hill-trolls charges into Pippin’s company. One of the
					trolls pounces on Beregond, but Pippin stabs the troll with his
					sword. The troll topples forward and crushes the startled hobbit.
					Pippin begins to lose consciousness. He bids farewell to the world,
					and just as everything turns dark, Pippin hears a great clamor of
					voices shouting, “The Eagles are coming!”

As the famous Christian writer and friend of Tolkien C.S.
					Lewis observed, the chief differences between the good and evil
					characters in The Lord of the Rings involve imagination
					and logic. The evil forces, says Lewis, cannot imagine themselves
					doing anything else but evil; for them, evil is the only logical
					option—a necessary and impulsive inclination. The good, in contrast,
					can conceive of doing evil, but they choose to
					do good; for them, life is a series of free choices. As such, the
					good have the power to choose to take actions that are spontaneous
					or unexpected—a power that Sauron does not seem to have. Indeed,
					we see this ability to choose clearly in this chapter. Sauron expects
					a challenge from the Captains of the West, assuming that the new
					Ring-bearer—whom Sauron believes to be Aragorn—is moving in dangerous
					haste, driven by the vision of power that the Ring has surely fed
					to his ego. Greed backed by violence is the only line of reasoning
					Sauron can understand. He cannot imagine that the armies of the
					West might march toward Mordor as a smokescreen or with the motive
					of personal sacrifice.

This ability of the forces of good to foil Sauron’s expectations sets
					the ground for the deep sense of irony that pervades the closing chapters
					of Book V. Legolas and Gimli, in the account of their journey, note
					the irony that Aragorn has defeated Mordor’s forces on the Anduin
					River with the very spirits of the Dead who themselves once worshipped
					Sauron. In a strategic sense, the march to Mordor is ironic in two
					ways: first, an opposing force would approach enemy territory shouting
					and singing their claim over the land; second, Sauron thinks he
					is cunningly luring Aragorn’s forces in, when it is actually Aragorn’s
					forces who approach Mordor of their own accord, with the intention
					of playing into Sauron’s hands.

The deepest irony of this section lies in the confrontation
					with the Lieutenant before the Black Gate. For one, we know that
					the Lieutenant’s bold words are only a show. We recall that in the
					final moments of The Two Towers, Sam cast aside
					his sword in favor of Frodo’s, and that the Orcs did not kill Frodo
					but only disrobed him of his mithril coat. Armed
					with his lies, the Lieutenant does not expect to be so coldly dismissed
					by a military force only one-tenth the size of his own. Gandalf
					uses a double entendre to toy with the Lieutenant’s expectations:
					when the Lieutenant instructs the wizard to take or leave his demands,
					Gandalf shouts, “[T]hese we will take!” and takes the coat, cloak,
					and sword from the Lieutenant. Gandalf’s spontaneous verbal irony
					yields an equally spontaneous reaction from the Lieutenant, whose
					look of sudden fear betrays his attempt to maintain his proud and
					evil demeanor.

Gandalf’s words are not merely rhetorical, though, for
					they remain consistent with the wizard’s overall approach to confronting evil
					throughout The Lord of the Rings. Both before the
					Balrog in the Mines of Moria and before the Lord of the Nazgûl at
					the gates of Minas Tirith, Gandalf abandons his formidable magic
					powers in favor of the power of words, confronting his enemies with
					speech and commanding them to turn from their violent intentions.
					Here, Gandalf similarly commands the Lieutenant, yelling, “Begone!” The
					wizard’s authoritative words offer his adversaries the opportunity
					to choose between doing evil and relenting toward the side of good.
					In this regard, Gandalf implies that good and evil are not diametrically
					opposed forces or powers in the natural world, but rather two choices
					available to the mind and the will.

