Obasan saves the twine from Aunt Emily’s package, as she
					saves everything: string, thread, tiny amounts of leftover food.
					Naomi reflects that perhaps painful memories, like Obasan’s most
					disgusting bits of forgotten food, are horrifying only if brought
					out and looked at.

Obasan says, “ ‘Everyone someday dies,’ ” a sentence she
					has been repeating almost like a mantra. She leaves the room. Naomi realizes
					that the book Aunt Emily included in her package consists of letters
					from Emily to Naomi’s mother, whom Emily called Nesan (older
					sister). Obasan comes back holding a photo Naomi has seen before.
					It is of her mother, and herself as a toddler.

Naomi vividly remembers the moment the photo was taken.
					A boy was staring at her and her mother as the picture was taken,
					and she was full of fear. Her Japanese relatives taught her that
					staring is rude and aggressive. Naomi remembers a man winking at
					her as she rode a streetcar with her mother. She thinks about taking
					scorching hot baths with her Grandma Kato, who used to scrub her
					clean with washcloths. Naomi doesn’t think it’s a good idea to dwell
					on her childhood home in Vancouver, but recalling Aunt Emily’s exhortations
					to remember the past, she forces herself to continue. She remembers
					the house as filled with paintings, records, musical instruments,
					and plants. She remembers listening to her mother, father, and brother
					play music, herself sitting as silent as the goldfish and the statue
					in the room despite her family’s attempt to draw her in. She remembers
					her toys and her pretty bedroom.

Naomi thinks of the stories her relatives told her at
					bedtime when she was a child. She always asked for the tale of Momotaro.
					She recalls looking at the peach tree in her window while her mother told
					her about two old people, Grandmother and Grandfather. One day Grandmother
					was washing clothes when a peach (momo) floated
					to her down a waterfall. When Grandfather came home, she showed
					him the fruit. As they looked at it, a boy, Momotaro, jumped out
					of the peach. Eventually Momotaro had to leave, and Grandmother
					gave him rice balls for his trip. She and Grandfather said goodbye
					without sadness, so as not to weigh him down. They hoped that he
					would behave honorably, which is the most important thing.

Naomi thinks of the way her mother and grandmother anticipated
					her needs. She never cried, because they knew when she was hungry,
					cold, tired, or uncomfortable and solved the problem almost before
					she had noticed it herself. Naomi doesn’t remember ever being punished.
					According to Aunt Emily, she never talked or smiled, either.

Naomi recalls an incident from her youth. Her parents
					had purchased baby chicks, and Naomi moved them from their box to
					the cage where a hen was already living. As she watched, the hen
					began attacking the chicks and pecking them to death. Naomi ran
					to fetch Mother, who was sitting with her friend Mrs. Sugimoto.
					As Mother calmly rescued the remaining chicks, Mrs. Sugimoto stared
					at Naomi. Then a group of loud neighborhood boys ran into the yard. Mother
					didn’t talk about the incident with Naomi until after everyone had
					left and calm was restored.

Naomi remembers Old Man Gower, the next-door neighbor who
					used to “[carry her] away,” as she puts it, always making her promise
					never to tell her mother. Something similar happened with a boy
					named Percy, who shoved her against a wall during a game of hide-and-seek.
					As an adult, Naomi has a recurring nightmare. In its latest variation,
					“three beautiful oriental women” were naked in a road, guarded by
					soldiers. One of the women wriggled seductively, feeling both excited
					and full of hate. Despite her efforts, the soldiers shot at the
					women’s feet. Naomi returns to her memory of Old Man Gower. When
					she was four, he took her into his verdant yard, sat her on his
					lap, and put “his mouth on [her] face.” Soon after, he undressed
					her on the pretext of fixing a cut on her knee. As usual, he told
					her not to tell her mother. Naomi tells her secret: She sought out Old
					Man Gower of her own volition. Not being able to tell her mother
					what was going on tore her apart.

The act of recollecting the past fills Naomi with fear.
					She equates memories with the long-forgotten scraps of food that
					fill Obasan’s refrigerator. According to this metaphor, the memories,
					like the food, are spoiled, repulsive, hidden in dark corners, even
					terrifying. Interestingly, for Naomi this comparison applies not
					just to painful memories, but also to happy ones. She is just as
					unwilling to reminisce about her idyllic childhood home as she would
					be to clean the farthest recesses of Obasan’s fridge. Dwelling on
					past happiness is as dangerous for Naomi as dwelling on past grievances.
					Remembering a childhood spent in the bosom of a loving family only
					causes pain by stirring up longings that can’t be satisfied.

Despite her reluctance, though, Naomi is half-convinced
					that Aunt Emily is right, and that to forget the past is to cripple
					one’s self. In these chapters, she begins a tentative plunge backward
					into her childhood. It begins with thoughts of her mother, whose
					presence and absence have been taboo topics up to this point in
					the novel. Naomi’s new willingness to linger on her mother’s admonitions, songs,
					stories, and behavior indicates her increasing bravery about facing
					up to her memories.

We get the sense that despite the happiness of her childhood, Naomi
					has always felt like something of an outsider in her family. The
					remembered scene in the music room suggests that Naomi’s mother,
					father, and brother are unified by their ability to play music together.
					Naomi sits on the periphery of this charmed circle. The fact that
					she identifies more with the goldfish and the statue than with the
					members of her family points to her sense of alienation.

It is not the case, however, that Naomi’s family intentionally excludes
					her. On the contrary, they try to pull her into the circle. Her father
					and Stephen interrupt their music to talk to her, and her mother
					indulges Naomi’s insatiable taste for the story of Momotaro. It
					seems to be Naomi’s natural diffidence and inward-looking personality
					that sets her apart from her family. She welcomes their attentions
					and thrives on their love, but part of her is held apart, observing.
					As Aunt Emily says, Naomi was an exceptionally silent, serious,
					and unsmiling child.

Chapter 10 touches on two concepts
					that are central in Naomi’s family: the necessity of behaving with
					honor, and the importance of “sensitivity and appropriate gestures.”
					For Naomi, the concepts are linked. When she wants a real-life example
					of behaving with honor, she has only to think about the way her
					mother and grandmother anticipate her needs and try to make her
					comfortable in any way they can. Naomi suggests that these two concepts,
					if embraced, lead to remarkably serene households. Children need
					not cry or rebel if they are cared for vigilantly. When children
					become adults, they will replicate the loving behavior they learned
					from their elders, and care for the people who once cared for them.

In the same chapter that contains the upsetting revelation
					about Old Man Gower, we hear the story of the slain chicks. Naomi’s
					fate resembles the chicks’. She is a defenseless being, practically
					a baby, powerless to resist the violent attack of an adult. But
					there is a key difference between the incident with the chicks and
					the pattern of Old Man Gower’s abuse. When Naomi was distraught
					over the dead chicks, she was able to seek refuge in her mother’s
					presence and calm, and in the knowledge that a loving and responsible
					adult saw what had happened and cared about it. When Naomi was worried about
					Old Man Gower, however, his admonitions and her shame prevented
					her from going to her mother. The silence and the separation from
					her mother hurt Naomi as much as the abuse itself. She was alone
					with her grief and confusion.

Naomi’s recurring dream is another key to understanding
					the abuse she suffered. In the dream, the men are all-powerful.
					They are clothed, they have official authority, and they bear weapons.
					The women, who are explicitly identified as “oriental,” are powerless. They
					are naked, they are captive, and they are unarmed. The invincible,
					violent men and the helpless women of Naomi’s dream reflect her
					experience as a victim at Old Man Gower’s hands. Perhaps even more
					important, though, is what one of the women feels. As she writhes
					in the street, she is both aroused and angry. These contradictory
					and simultaneous feelings are what most upset Naomi as a child.
					When she refers to “the secret,” she does not mean the abuse, but
					the fact that Old Man Gower’s hands gave her pleasure even as they
					scared her. This sexual enjoyment, while unwanted and inadvertent,
					fills Naomi with shame.

