In a dingy hotel in the provinces, Levin meets Nikolai,
					who is clearly at death’s door. Kitty insists on seeing Nikolai
					too, and he greets her pleasantly. Levin cannot bear to look at
					Nikolai, but the more practical Kitty immediately gets down to work
					to lessen the dying man’s suffering, displaying remarkable compassion
					and empathy for him. Kitty’s tenderness touches Nikolai. Levin meditates
					on how he fears death more than Kitty, even though he is more intelligent
					than she. He concludes that he is self-centered whereas she is selfless.

The next day, Nikolai takes communion and feels better,
					passing a half-hour without coughing. But then the cough returns.
					Nikolai tells Kitty—whom he calls by her Russian name, Katia—to
					leave the room, as he will die soon. He continues to linger between
					life and death, however. Kitty, meanwhile, feels ill and vomits.
					After several tedious days of waiting, Nikolai finally passes away.
					The doctor tells Kitty that she is vomiting because she is pregnant.

Karenin, meanwhile, cannot grasp what has led him to his
					current misery. Asked to pay one of Anna’s overdue bills, he nearly breaks
					down. His career is at a standstill. The narrator fills us in on Karenin’s
					childhood: an orphan, Karenin grew up with many awards and distinctions
					but without intimacy in his life. Now, his friend Lydia Ivanovna
					urges him to trust in Jesus and offers to run his household. Forlornly
					in love with Karenin herself, Lydia Ivanovna has replaced erotic
					passion with religious love. However, she is spiteful toward Anna,
					refusing to acknowledge Anna’s letter pleading to see Seryozha.
					Lydia Ivanovna informs Karenin that Anna is in St. Petersburg, which
					makes Karenin glum. He asserts that he cannot thwart Anna’s maternal
					love for her son. Lydia Ivanovna maliciously asks whether Anna truly
					loves her son.

Seryozha’s birthday arrives, and his joy in getting gifts
					is heightened by his pride that his father has received an official
					award. The boy bombards his tutor with questions about his father’s
					award, but the tutor insists he concentrate on schoolwork. Seryozha
					wonders why the tutor does not love him. Lydia Ivanovna has told
					Seryozha that his mother is dead to him, but he still hopes to see
					Anna again. Karenin visits Seryozha and quizzes him on his religious
					lessons. Seryozha does not do well, and Karenin is disappointed
					in his son’s progress.

Upon returning to St. Petersburg, Vronsky and Anna stay
					in a fine hotel. They hope to resume their social life but are thwarted. Everyone
					shuns them, even Betsy Tverskaya, who explains that she cannot risk
					the public shame of socializing with Anna. Anna receives Karenin’s
					denial of her plea to see Seryozha and is devastated. Determined
					to see her son anyway, she buys him toys for his birthday and visits
					the Karenin home one morning, hiding her face until she has entered.

The servants recognize Anna and bring her to Seryozha.
					Mother and son chat, and Anna cries with joy and regret. Seryozha’s
					former nanny, also visiting him, informs Anna that Karenin is soon
					to enter the room. Anna hurries away but encounters Karenin on her
					way out. As she leaves, she realizes that she never got the chance
					to give Seryozha his toys. Returning to the hotel in a daze, Anna
					is unable to fathom her present situation. Moreover, she suddenly
					feels less love toward her infant daughter, Annie. Anna mentally
					reproaches Vronsky for abandoning her lately.

Vronsky returns to the hotel to find Anna with Princess
					Oblon-skaya, an old, unmarried aunt of Anna’s with a bad reputation. Anna
					announces that she plans to attend the opera that evening. Vronsky
					begs her not to, warning her of the fact that the members of high
					society at the theater will scorn and humiliate her. He believes that
					she wishes to deliberately provoke and insult conventional society.

Nevertheless, Anna leaves for the opera. Vronsky follows
					later and watches in horror as Anna is insulted by acquaintances
					in the neighboring box. Anna returns home angry and desperate. Vronsky reassures
					her of his love, and the two depart for the countryside.

Just before we see Anna reach the depths of humiliation
					in her public disgrace, Tolstoy shows us a glimpse of Anna in private,
					at her most tender and maternal moment. The author juxtaposes the
					two extremes of Anna’s personality: just as we have never seen her
					so brazenly in the public eye as during her time at the opera, so
					too have we never seen her quite so loving and motherly as when
					she secretly brings birthday presents to her son. We have frequently heard
					that she loves Seryozha, but her tears of joy at seeing him prove
					that love. The birthday scene is crucial because it reminds us that
					the love for which Anna lives is not just romantic love but parental
					love as well. Her life is defined by the fact that she cares for certain
					people and does not care for others. In this regard, she is not a
					dizzy romantic dreamer like Flaubert’s deluded Madame Bovary. Anna
					does not throw away her past in pursuit of a dashing love interest
					but simply and passionately tries to find and stick by true love
					in all its forms, whether lover or son.

These chapters all center on human isolation, exploring
					this concept from different angles through the experiences of different
					characters. Karenin’s loneliness nearly pushes him to a nervous breakdown
					as his family life and professional career fall apart. The man who
					once seemed invincible now appears surprisingly frail. Tolstoy suggests
					that isolation can topple even giants. We learn that Karenin was
					an orphan, raised without parental intimacy. In giving us Karenin’s
					childhood history, the author invites us to conclude that Karenin’s
					later pursuit of status and honor is an attempt to fill the void
					left by the lack of family love. Seryozha may well feel this same
					lack of love, and we fear that he may grow up to be just like his father.
					When Seryozha asks his tutor about official awards and wonders why
					the tutor does not love him more, we see that the boy mixes intimacy
					and honors in his mind as much as his father does. 

Anna’s humiliation in the theater is, of course, another
					case of isolation—a painful, forced ostracism. The dying Nikolai
					is isolated as well, and Kitty’s companionship is like a medicine
					to him. Though Nikolai does not recover, Kitty’s kindness makes
					his final days far less lonely and frightening than they might have
					been. The healing power of Kitty’s company for Nikolai reminds us
					that simple togetherness can have a miraculous effect in curing
					the great ill of isolation that afflicts mankind.

