Ser Ciappelletto, a notary of Prato, is one of the worst men ever born. Ciappelletto is proud of his ability to falsify documents. He never goes to church, always uses foul language, and treats women like beasts. He is a glutton, a heavy drinker, and a gambler who cheats at cards. Ciappelletto is also a smooth talker who can easily convince other people that he is telling the truth, even though everything he says is a lie. He gets an undeserved reputation after death because he tells lies on his deathbed in his final confession to an ancient priest.

Gualtieri is a noble, moral, handsome man who is also trustworthy. His reputation leads to his appointment as a temporary ruler of France. However, that same moral nature gets Gualtieri into trouble when he rejects the sexual advances of the king’s daughter-in-law. Gualtieri has to go into exile, give up his children, and work as a humble groom, but he responds nobly to these twists of fate.

Gilette is the daughter of a physician who is in love with Bertrand, the son of her father’s employer, the Count of Roussillon. Bertrand is so far above Gilette in social class that she has little hope of marrying him. However, when Gilette uses her medical skills to cure the King of France, he rewards her with marriage to Bertrand. Then Gilette takes on the challenge of persuading her husband to love and honor her. Gilette’s story is the source for the plot of All’s Well That End’s Well by William Shakespeare.

Lisabetta is an uncommonly gracious and beautiful young woman living with her three brothers, who are rich merchants. She is also sly and resourceful. Although her brothers have total control over her life, Lisabetta manages to conduct an affair with Lorenzo, a handsome young employee of her brothers. The brothers take Lorenzo out of town, murder him, and tell Lisabetta that he is on a business trip. She discovers the truth when Lorenzo appears to her in a dream. Lisabetta spends the rest of her short life mourning Lorenzo in a bizarre way and going insane.

Caterina and Ricciardo are stock characters, two young people in love. Both are from good families and are of generally good character. Caterina and Ricciardo deceive others only because their youth makes it impossible for them to control their passions. When they are discovered unclothed and listening to the nightingale together, Ricciardo responds with honor, and Caterina’s desires are suitably rewarded.

Monna Nonna de’ Pulci is a beautiful young woman and a recent bride. She is also intelligent with a strong sense of self-respect. Nonna becomes the object of unwanted attention from a bishop and a wealthy gentleman who is the bishop’s friend. The bishop tries to solicit Nonna on his friend’s behalf, but she returns a sharp answer that shames the bishop and makes the two men ride away in silence. Unfortunately, since the time of her story, Nonna has died of the plague.

Isabella is a beautiful and very intelligent young woman who is married to a nobleman of great excellence. She is a pragmatist who wants to maintain her prestigious and comfortable existence but also a romanticist in love with an agreeable young man of humble origins. When a powerful gentleman also starts pestering Isabella with his unwanted attentions, Isabella uses her quick wits to protect her young lover, get rid of the powerful gentleman without offending him, and keep her husband ignorant.

Spinelloccio and Zeppa are two young men of good plebeian families who grow up together and are closer than brothers. They live next door to each other and are both married to beautiful wives who also become friends. Their friendship is so close that it cannot be broken, even after Spinelloccio has a love affair with Zeppa’s wife. Spinelloccio and Zeppa resolve their dispute in a manner that makes both couples happy.

Protagonists of the ninth story of the ninth day, told by Emilia. Melissus and Joseph are two young men who live in the Holy Land. They meet on the road to Jerusalem, on their way to seek advice from King Solomon. Melissus is a wealthy, insecure social climber who knows people don’t like him even though they come to his banquets. Joseph is insecure because he can’t get his wife to obey his commands. Neither young man understands King Solomon’s advice.

Griselda is a beautiful, intelligent, and capable woman from a very poor family whose husband, a nobleman, marries her on a whim. Griselda shows her fine qualities by becoming the ideal nobleman’s wife, and for a while, they live in great happiness. Then Griselda’s husband begins testing her patience with various cruel actions, such as taking her children from her and sending her back to her family. Griselda’s patient response to these indignities brings out even more noble aspects of her character.

