Sam and Frodo run away from Cirith Ungol as horns peal
					in the tower. They run onto a long bridge, but as they approach
					the other side, they hear a company of orcs quickly approaching.
					The orcs cannot see the two hobbits, but are heading straight for
					them. Frodo and Sam jump over the edge of the bridge, landing safely
					on the side of a cliff. With great difficulty, they clamber down
					to the valley below. Mount Doom lies to the east, but the hobbits
					travel northward, hoping to evade any Orc search parties.

Frodo and Sam have only some of Faramir’s provisions,
					a few lembas, and no water. After a night of weary
					travel, they find a small stream and joyously refill their water
					bottles. The Ring grows heavier around Frodo’s neck with every step.
					Mount Doom is still nearly forty miles to the east, across a great
					valley. Behind the mountain sits Barad-dûr, Sauron’s home, from
					which the Dark Lord directs his will over Mordor. Scattered all
					over the valley, as far as the two hobbits can see, the armies of
					Mordor await the final battle. There is no hope of moving undetected
					through so many enemies, but Frodo and Sam again have no choice
					but to go on. They continue moving northward, looking for a good
					place to leave the mountains and move east. They overhear two orcs
					quarrelling, speaking of a rumor about a great Elf in bright armor
					who is on the loose.

On the third day, Frodo and Sam turn into a narrow eastward road
					and travel over it for several miles in the darkness. After some time,
					they hear a great company of orcs approaching from behind. The hobbits
					are unable to move aside, and the company overtakes them, but in
					the darkness its leader assumes the hobbits are orcs and forces
					them into line with the others. For what seems like hours, they
					travel with the Orc company at an excruciating pace. Frodo is in
					agony from the Ring’s increasing weight. After a time, they reach a
					busy crossroads. Armies from the south are moving in anticipation of
					Aragorn’s army. In the confusion of the converging companies, Frodo
					and Sam jump aside and crawl behind a nearby boulder.

Sam emerges in these chapters as perhaps the most important
					hero of the entire novel. He represents the quintessential Hobbit
					hero, the virtues of which Merry displays briefly in Book V. Daring
					yet self-deprecating, Sam succeeds because he approaches the heroic
					challenge with a certain lightheartedness, as though he is playing
					at being a hero. He jokes that he is an “Elf-hero” and shrugs his
					shoulders as he launches through the gate of Cirith Ungol. Sam remains centered
					and focused because, as he realizes, he cannot escape his “plain
					Hobbit-sense.” That he is a gardener by trade has metaphorical significance,
					as Sam is used to dirtying his hands in the earth and does not think
					lofty thoughts of power or of reaching great heights. These correctives
					to Sam’s pride help him focus on the proper goals of his quest—serving
					Frodo and guarding the Ring. At the same time, Sam’s playfulness
					leads him to trust his impulses, such as using the phial of Galadriel
					and unwittingly singing a song to lead him to Frodo.

Tolkien implies that love is an important aspect of heroism,
					as we see in the way Sam is inspired by his love for Frodo. It is
					not that Sam’s attention to Frodo supersedes his commitment to the
					Ring-quest; rather, Sam implicitly understands that love and loyalty
					are essential to the success of the quest itself. Freedom, love,
					friendship, and the preservation of life are the goals of the Fellowship.
					Sam must save Frodo before he can carry out the destruction of the
					Ring, Gandalf must save Faramir from the burning pyre in order to
					prevent evil from gripping Minas Tirith, and Aragorn must set the
					captives free when he takes the ships by force from the allies of
					Mordor. Throughout The Lord of the Rings, Tolkien
					stresses the primacy of friendship and immediate social responsibility
					over more nebulous ideas of heroism or valor.

The closeness of Sam and Frodo to the Orc forces reminds
					us how the hobbits’ nondescript appearance—and their modest ordinariness
					in general—is often an asset to them on their journey. A more noble
					and knightly presence, like that of Aragorn or Théoden, would have
					stood out from the Orc contingent, and would have been immediately
					destroyed. But Frodo and Sam, who are not much to look at, pass
					unnoticed even when they are swept along in the midst of the marching
					Orc army. Moreover, their proximity to the Orcs allows them to overhear
					the Orc discussion of the rumor that a great Elf in bright armor
					is on the loose. The hobbits are thus allowed to see what the knights
					like Aragorn cannot—the nervous and anxious side of the enemy they
					are preparing to meet. Elrond’s words from the earliest parts of
					the novel, in Book II, ring true: the nature of the Ring-quest is
					such that the weak and the small are just as likely to succeed as
					the strong.

