Reuven awakes to commotion in the hospital
					and the sound of the radio. Mr. Savo tells him that it is D-Day:
					the Allied forces have landed on the coast of France. For the rest
					of the morning, Mr. Savo, Billy, and Reuven excitedly listen to
					news of the war. As he listens to his radio, Reuven prays fervently
					with his tefillin. Mr. Savo asks why he is so religious, and Reuven
					reveals that he plans to become a rabbi. 

After lunch, a sickly six-year-old patient walks into
					the ward and asks to play catch with Mr. Savo. Mr. Savo explains
					that the boy, named Mickey, has been hospitalized for most of his
					life due to a strange stomach condition. Thinking about such a tragic
					situation, Mr. Savo tells Reuven that they live in a “[c]razy world.
					Cockeyed.” Savo plays catch with Mickey, but the nurse scolds him.
					Mr. Savo’s condition is apparently much worse than he has let on,
					and the exertion of playing catch pains him.

	Soon after, Mr. Galanter comes to pay Reuven a brief
					visit. He and Reuven discuss the invasion, and Reuven mentions that
					Billy’s uncle is a bomber pilot. Billy eagerly joins the conversation,
					asking Mr. Galanter why he is not fighting in the war, assuming
					that he was injured overseas. Mr. Galanter becomes extremely embarrassed, and
					hints at a physical condition that prevents him from serving. Reuven
					feels bad for his teacher’s embarrassment and, after Mr. Galanter
					leaves, Reuven falls asleep thinking about him, while continuing
					to fear for his own eye.

	Reuven is awakened by a figure standing by his bed. When
					he opens his good eye, he is shocked to see Danny Saunders. Danny tries
					to apologize for injuring Reuven, but Reuven rudely dismisses him.
					Immediately, Reuven feels foolish for having treated Danny in such
					a way. Later that evening, Reuven’s father comes to visit. After he
					hears about the encounter with Danny, he reprimands Reuven. After
					Mr. Malter leaves, Roger Merrit, Billy’s father, introduces himself
					to Reuven. He asks Reuven to call Billy at home after he leaves
					the hospital, and Reuven agrees. 

The next day, Danny returns and Reuven apologizes for
					his rudeness. Danny sits down at the edge of Reuven’s bed and tells
					him that he had wanted to kill him during the ball game, but he
					cannot understand why. When Reuven compliments Danny on his playing, Danny
					tells Reuven that his father permits him to practice baseball and
					read books only after he completes his required daily quota of Talmud—an
					astounding four pages a day. Danny reveals that this burden is in
					fact quite easy for him, because he has a photographic memory. He
					further explains that he is expected to take his father’s place
					as rabbi and leader of their Hasidic community, even though he would
					rather become a psychologist. Reuven, in turn, says that his father
					would like him to become a mathematician, but he is more interested
					in becoming a rabbi. Danny also reveals a curious fact about his
					father: Reb Saunders believes that “words distort what a person
					really feels in his heart,” and he “wishes everyone could talk in
					silence.” Danny leaves, promising to return the next day.

Chapter 3 begins with a lengthy
					description of the patients’ reaction to D-day, highlighting the
					historical circumstances of the novel’s setting. At first glance,
					this may appear to be a digression that has little or nothing to
					do with the main story about the relationship between Danny and
					Reuven. However, world events—and the characters’ reactions and
					relations to these events—play an important role in The
						Chosen. The events of World War II are important to Jewish history
					as well as to world history in general, and in later chapters, we
					see that Danny and Reuven’s relationship is inseparable from its historical
					context. Specifically, the Holocaust and its ramifications for the
					global Jewish community force the characters to examine the relationship
					between tradition and modernity.

	Despite the differences between Reuven’s and Danny’s
					beliefs, both boys exist in Jewish communities that are markedly
					different from mainstream American culture. Furthermore, as Danny
					and Reuven talk in earnest for the first time, their similarities
					surprise them. Reuven is surprised by Danny’s perfect English speech
					and openness about his feelings—Danny does not fit Reuven’s stereotypes
					about Hasids. Reuven is learning to see Danny differently, by looking
					beyond superficial appearances. Reuven finds he and Danny have a
					lot in common, including an intense competitive drive and a fervent
					intellectual passion.

	The parallel-but-opposite nature of Reuven’s and Danny’s
					situations emphasizes the difference in their relationships with
					their respective fathers. Danny wants to become an intellectual,
					but feels obligated to become a rabbi; whereas Reuven wants to become
					a rabbi, but feels pressure from his father to be an intellectual. Although
					Reuven does not discuss his own upbringing in this chapter, we see
					in Chapter 2 that Reuven and David Malter
					have an open, easy relationship built upon mutual concern and respect.
					In Chapter 3, Danny’s descriptions of Reb
					Saunders’s dominating parenting—the intense daily Talmud study he
					prescribes, his strong feelings against the apikorsim, his refusal
					to write or speak to his son—set up a contrast between Reb Saunders
					and David Malter, and between the two father-son relationships in
					the book. The contrasts between Danny and Reuven primarily revolve
					around the issue of choice. Danny is surprised that Reuven has chosen
					to become a rabbi, and then resignedly describes his own situation
					by emphasizing that he has no choice but to take father’s place.

