On one quest, Lancelot rescues Gawaine, who has been captured
					by an evil knight named Sir Carados. Later, left alone one morning
					at the home of his cousin, Sir Lionel, Lancelot is captured by four queens—one
					of whom is Morgan le Fay—but he refuses their demands to take one
					of them as his mistress. He escapes with the help of the girl who
					serves his meals, and in exchange, he agrees to fight in a tournament
					on behalf of her father, King Bagdemagus.

Fighting with a shield that has no insignia so no one
					will recognize him, Lancelot steers King Bagdemagus’s side to victory
					in the tournament. Lancelot then sets out to find Lionel. He discovers
					that Sir Turquine, Sir Carados’s brother, has captured Lionel and
					sixty-three other knights. Lancelot and Turquine fight a fierce
					battle, and Turquine is so impressed by Lancelot, whom he does not
					recognize, that he agrees to release his captives as long as the
					unfamiliar knight is not Lancelot. Lancelot informs Turquine of
					his identity, and after fighting for two more hours, manages to
					kill him. Gaheris is among the freed captives, and he marvels at
					how Lancelot keeps helping the Orkneys. Another of the captives,
					he tells Lancelot, is Agravaine.

One day in the summer, a beautiful lady asks
					Lancelot to climb a tree to retrieve her falcon. When Lancelot removes
					his armor, the lady’s husband, a fat knight, attacks him. The fat
					knight is a member of the upper classes losing power under Arthur’s
					rule, and he refuses to listen to Lancelot’s pleas for a fair fight.
					Lancelot eventually kills the fat knight. Later, Lancelot meets
					a knight who is trying to kill his own wife for adultery. Lancelot
					rides between them, but the knight tricks Lancelot into looking
					in a different direction and then cuts off the wife’s head. The
					knight then begs for mercy, and Lancelot, unable to kill a man begging
					for his life, spares him. Lancelot has a number of other adventures, and
					he always sends his prisoners back to Arthur’s court, at Carlion,
					to bow before Guenever rather than before Arthur.

Guenever is pleased at these signs of Lancelot’s love,
					and she is so swept away by them that when Lancelot returns, they
					are drawn to each other instantly. She still loves Arthur, but with
					a sort of awed affection. While Lancelot tries to repress his feelings,
					Arthur worries that his knights have become too fixated with what
					he calls “games-mania,” in which every knight compares his prowess
					to everyone else’s. He worries particularly about the Orkneys, whose
					father, Lot, was accidentally killed by Pellinore. Now that her
					husband is dead, Morgause is trying to seduce every knight she can,
					and the Orkney knights are becoming uncontrollable as a result.

With Lancelot’s adventures, White gets to the heart of
					the Arthurian tradition, but his interpretation of the classic stories
					goes in a purposefully different direction. Malory’s influence on
					White is more apparent here than in any of the novel’s other books,
					and he is cited in almost every one of Lancelot’s quests. Even Malory’s
					fifteenth-century language colors White’s narrative. On Lancelot’s
					first adventure, when he finds Gawaine held captive by Sir Carados, Gawaine
					tells Lancelot that his current situation is “Never so hard, unless
					that ye help me, for without ye rescue me, I know nae knight that
					may.” In earlier passages, Gawaine speaks modern English with a
					Scottish accent, but this snippet of dialogue written in archaic English
					is taken straight out of Malory’s fifteenth-century text. All of
					the later episodes in Chapters 7 and 8 are
					told, with matching details, in Malory’s Morte d’Arthur. In the
					first two books of the novel, White tries to produce his own version
					of the Arthurian legend. But the first chapters of “The Ill-Made
					Knight,” the third book, try more specifically to interpret Malory’s
					work on King Arthur. These chapters take events from Malory’s Arthurian
					story and, without changing any details, make us wonder if there
					is more to them than Malory might have thought.

This third book elaborates on the evil knight, a topic
					that is only hinted at earlier in the novel. Arthur has enemies
					in earlier chapters, most notably King Lot, but these early enemies
					are primarily motivated by power rather than a difference in ideology.
					Early on, we hear about the old philosophy of might makes right,
					but we do not see examples of this idea until now. Sir Carados and
					Sir Turquine are both prime examples. They ride around the country
					and take knights hostage for their own amusement. They are variations
					on the character of Sir Bruce Sans Pitié, the backstabbing knight
					who is mentioned, but never appears in earlier chapters. Even kings
					such as Lot follow certain rules, but now we see knighthood at its
					most corrupt, used only to bully other people. Chapter 8 presents
					two more examples, even more appalling, of this abuse. One knight
					uses his lady to persuade Lancelot to scale a tree, and then he
					tries to kill Lancelot with no armor or weapons handy. The other
					knight takes advantage of Lancelot’s gullibility to cut off his
					own wife’s head. A number of Arthur’s knights, including Gawaine,
					Agravaine, and Kay, seem petty and malicious, and we may wonder
					what they are doing at Arthur’s court. In comparison to the figures
					in Chapter 8, however, Gawaine and his companions
					shine, and we can see why Arthur might enlist them to put down worse
					tyrants.

