Moving on to "the shelves which hold books by the living,"
					the narrator finds that women are currently writing nearly as many
					books as men, and that they are not only novels. "There are books
					on all sorts of subjects which a generation ago no woman could have touched."
					In assessing the change has occurred in women's writing in her own
					generation, the narrator pulls down a novel called Life's Adventure by
					Mary Carmichael. It is her first novel. Looking to see what this
					young writer has inherited from women of the past—both writers and
					non-writers, both "their characteristics and restrictions"—she first
					decides that the prose is not as good as Jane Austen's. "The smooth
					gliding of sentence after sentence was interrupted. Something tore,
					something scratched." She soon revises her opinion, however, noting
					that Miss Carmichael's writing actually has nothing in common with
					Austen's; it is attempting something completely different. "First
					she broke the sentence; now she has broken the sequence. Very well,
					she has every right to do both these things if she does them not
					for the sake of breaking, but for the sake of creating."

The decisive moment in Mary Carmichael's innovation comes with
					the words, "Chloe liked Olivia." The narrator stands slackjawed.
					How rarely, she realizes, has literature presented real, amicable
					relationships between women! Women were always, at least until the
					nineteenth century, considered in their relationship to men, and
					this has resulted in a huge and grave omission from literary history,
					and all history. "Hence, perhaps, the peculiar nature of woman in
					fiction; the astonishing extremes of her beauty and horror; her alternations
					between heavenly goodness and hellish depravity—for so a lover would
					see her as his love rose or sank, was prosperous or unhappy." Women
					also, in Carmichael's book, have interests and pursuits outside
					the home. Chloe and Olivia work together in a laboratory, a fact
					which greatly changes the kind of friends they can be. The narrator
					begins to think that an importance transition has occurred, "for
					if Chloe likes Olivia and Mary Carmichael knows how to express it
					she will light a torch in that vast chamber where nobody has yet
					been." The real, unrecorded experience of women in solitude has
					been so little handled that its expression will stretch the existing
					resources of the English language.

Mary Carmichael will have her work cut out for her, the
					narrator fondly acknowledges. She does not represent the culmination
					of the literary development Woolf has in mind, "for she will still
					be encumbered with that self-consciousness" that keeps her in the
					realm of "the nature-novelist" rather than the contemplative artist.
					She will have to learn not only to tell the truth about women, but
					also to tell, gently and without rancor, that bit of truth about
					men that has gone untold because it is what they cannot see in themselves.
					But if Miss Carmichael does not have the genius of Austen or Eliot,
					the narrator observes, she has certain advantages—not just as a
					person but also as a writer—unknown to them. Her writing shows no
					rancor against men, and no resentment against her situation in life.
					"Fear and hatred were almost gone, or traces of them showed only
					in a slight exaggeration of the joy of freedom." In another hundred years,
					the author concludes, and with five hundred pounds and a room of
					her own, this Mary Carmichael will be a poet.

Mary Carmichael is the literary heir not only to the great
					women writers discussed in the previous chapter, but also "the descendent of
					all those other women whose circumstances I have been glancing at."
					Yet she takes on something very different than they would have attempted.
					Woolf gives us a little lesson in reading experimental writing (like
					Woolf's own), reminding us that "she has every right" to attempt
					new forms and styles, as long as she is creating something new rather
					than merely destroying what has gone before. Carmichael represents
					Woolf's take on the state of women's fiction in her own historical
					moment. She sees the female literary tradition as being poised on
					the verge of something unprecedented and exciting, and she takes
					the opportunity to point out its current shortcomings and to articulate
					a direction for the future.

"The natural simplicity, the epic age of women's writing
					may have gone," remarks the narrator, in reviewing the range of
					subjects upon which women in her own time have made themselves authors. This
					is the next logical step from Woolf's historical identification
					of "a woman's sentence." Although she draws attention to the idea that
					there is a natural way for women to write, a distinctive "woman's
					sentence," for example, she is also open to the idea that even that
					naturalness may be historically contingent. As women change, and
					as their social roles and circumstantial realities evolve, what
					is "natural" to them will presumably change as well. Such a change
					will indeed be for the better: "She may begin to use writing as
					an art, not as a method of self-expression." When this happens, will
					there still be such a thing as a "woman's sentence"? Woolf imagines
					so, for she wants to preserve the richness of difference between
					men and women. But it must be as flexible and evolving as women
					themselves.

Women have a creative power that differs substantially
					from that of men, one that has found expression, even in bygone
					ages, in non-literary ways. Education, she argues, should bring
					out those differences rather than enforcing similarity, and so acknowledge
					and enhance the richness and variety of human culture. "For we have too
					much likeness as it is."

