The scene changes from Oxbridge to London, where the narrator sits
					in a room attempting to write about Women and Fiction. She reviews
					the questions raised during the previous day at Oxbridge ("Why did
					men drink wine and women water? Why was one sex so prosperous and
					the other so poor? What effect has poverty on fiction? What conditions
					are necessary for the creation of works of art?") and then resolves
					upon a trip to the British Museum in order to "strain off what was
					personal and accidental in all these impressions and so reach the
					pure fluid, the essential oil of truth." She looks in the catalogue
					in the British Library for books about women and marvels at how
					many have been written, and under the rubrics of how many different
					disciplines. Checking the "M" listings, she finds that no such archive
					exists on the topic of males.

Arbitrarily selecting a few of these books, she finds
					a great array of opinions and topics and finally pauses resentfully
					with one professor's statement of "the mental, moral, and physical
					inferiority of women." She decides that these studies, whatever
					their differences, had all "been written in the red light of emotion
					and not in the white light of truth." They betray an underlying
					anger that prevents them from approaching their subject objectively.
					"Why are they angry?" the narrator asks herself as she breaks for
					lunch. She concludes that if the author of the study on the inferiority
					of women had argued dispassionately, she would not have become incensed
					herself: "I had been angry because he was angry." The narrator intuits
					a depth of motivation and response underlying this issue, and she
					decides that male scholars have been less interested in the inferiority
					of women than in preserving and authenticating their sense of male
					superiority. Women have served as mirrors to men, in this sense,
					for centuries.

Here, the narrator is interrupted by the necessity of
					paying the bill. She takes the opportunity, while on the subject
					of her own finances, to inform us that she was left a legacy of
					five hundred pounds a year by her aunt, Mary Beton. She remembers
					getting the letter at the same time that women were granted the
					vote, and observes that the inheritance was more important in securing
					her freedom. It relieved her not only of the obligation to work
					for a living, but also of hatred and bitterness of temperament.
					It allowed her to forgive men for their collective injustices toward
					women, and to see males too as victims in some ways of their education
					and culture. Ultimately, the financial freedom gave her the "freedom
					to think of things in themselves."

Returning home, the narrator finds herself entering into
					a strikingly domestic setting. She thinks to herself that it is
					nearly impossible to say whether the kinds of labor that have traditionally
					been performed by women are more or less valuable than the (usually more
					quantifiable) work done by men. The question is unanswerable: not
					only does domestic labor fall outside of any economic indexes of
					value, but its cultural value also changes "from decade to decade."
					She envisions a future in which there will be no gender-based division
					of labor. "But what bearing has all this upon the subject of my
					paper, Women and Fiction?" she wonders as she enters the house.

The narrator's first naive belief in the British Museum
					as a bastion of unadulterated truth is an ironic swipe on Woolf's
					part, and she quickly disabuses her protagonist of this error. Woolf
					herself does not hope to uncover any trans-historical truth about
					women, in part because her project is to show that the status of
					women (and literary achievement in general) is context-bound and
					historically relative. She does leave room, however, for a certain
					kind of objectivity in one's approach to the question. The work
					that has been done by men was written in anger, she is sure: "When
					I read what he wrote about women I thought, not of what he was saying,
					but of himself. When an author argues dispassionately he thinks
					only of the argument; and the reader cannot help thinking of the
					argument too." She advocates for a disinterested approach, which
					means that she must purge herself of her own anger at the kinds
					of analyses she has been reading. Her goal is to place herself above
					the fray of the war between the sexes, where the air is clearer
					and one is more likely to arrive at some kind of truth. The fictionalization
					of the essay is one of Woolf's strategies for removing the argument
					from her own personal injuries and resentments.

Woolf is careful not to blame men for the unequal treatment
					of women over the centuries. Or, inasmuch as she does blame them, she
					attributes the violences of patriarchy to universal human foibles. "Life
					for both sexes—and I look at them, shouldering their way along the
					pavement—is arduous, difficult, a perpetual struggle. It calls for
					gigantic courage and strength. More than anything, perhaps, creatures
					of illusion that we are, it calls for confidence in oneself." For
					men, over the ages, women have served as an instrument for reinforcing
					that necessary self-confidence. Women have been the mirrors in which
					man wished to see only the reflection of his own grandeur. If this
					has been detrimental to women, it is nevertheless true, the narrators
					surmises, that "mirrors are essential"—to "heroic action" as well
					as to violence. Yet in spite of her unwillingness to pass judgment
					in a personal or resentful way, she takes a stand against this sexist
					mode of operation from a cultural point of view, invoking fascist
					and dictatorial political regimes as the extreme models of this
					kind of thinking.

The narrator's ability to consider the subject of gender
					inequality with disinterestedness stems in large part from her financial
					independence. She has five hundred pounds a year, and the effect
					of that income is to dissolve the frustration and vulnerability
					that would color her thinking and writing in a negative way. It
					is for this same reason that the writer of literature, in Woolf's
					view, must enjoy the luxury of financial freedom. Artistic production,
					even more perhaps than rational argumentation, requires that all
					traces of the particular self be distilled in the "white light of
					truth."

