On the surface, Terry seems to undergo the most drastic transformation of
				any character in the novel. At first, Terry seems confident, funny, courageous,
				a natural leader of men, and, we are told, a charmer of ladies. Later, however,
				he is shown to be a bully, an abuser, and a fool. Terry hasn’t changed; rather,
				his true character has been revealed, and Van, the narrator, has come to see him
				in a new light. Terry arrives in Herland with a theory that men are naturally
				superior to women and that, consequently, every woman naturally enjoys being
				“mastered” by her man. This notion is part of the bedrock of Terry’s identity
				and the source of his self-image. In Gilman’s time, men of Terry’s type were
				referred to as “blackguards” (as opposed to “gentlemen” like Jeff), and Gilman
				is saying that one sign of the unhealthy state of our male-dominated culture is
				the way blackguards such as Terry are viewed as lovable rogues and not
				seen for the domineering, often violent sexists that they are. The
				task of a decent society, Gilman suggests, is to turn the laudable
				energy and drive of men such as Terry in a less anti-social, anti-woman
				direction.

Though Terry imagines himself a rugged individualist, he is actually just
				as dependent on women as he imagines women are on men. Without a woman to admire
				him, flirt with him, and be impressed by his bluster, Terry’s sense of himself
				as a man is challenged, and he becomes deeply insecure. Faced with a woman such
				as Alima, who is a match for him physically and intellectually and who has no
				desire to be subservient to a man, Terry doesn’t know what to do. Unlike Jeff,
				who is thoroughly converted to Herland’s ways, and unlike Van, who, though
				cautious, hopes to understand and learn from them, Terry’s response is to reject
				Herland and to insist ever more stridently on his male prerogatives. Once his
				fantasies are exploded, he cannot even see the beauty of Herland’s inhabitants,
				whom Terry sees as unwomanly because of their self-confidence, a society not of
				women, but of “neuters.” The more strident Terry becomes, however, the more
				foolish he looks, and the more estranged he becomes from his lover and even his
				friends.

