His two weeks nearly over, Alex goes once more to the
					screening room. He wears his old clothes, which the orderly gives
					him along with his old razor. Upon entering, Alex notes that the
					room looks quite different. A curtain covers the screen wall, and
					in place of the frosted glass are seated a group of men. Among them
					are Branom, Brodsky, the Minister of the Interior, the Chief Warden,
					the Staja Governor, and the chaplain. When Brodsky notices Alex
					enter, he winds down his lecture about the virtues of Reclamation
					Treatment and introduces Alex, his test subject. Brodsky then urges
					them all to observe Alex in action, as a model citizen. Confused,
					Alex stands before the curtain while the lights dim and a spotlight
					is focused on him. A large, older man walks up to Alex and insults
					him, twisting his ear, flicking his nose, and stepping on his foot.
					Alex reaches for his razor, but the “horrible killing sickness”
					immediately stops him. Alex’s only recourse, he reasons, is to change
					his hostile feelings toward the man. Alex tries to give him a present,
					but the man insults him, slapping the razor Alex offers him from
					Alex’s hand. Desperate to please, Alex licks his boots, and when
					the man begins kicking him, Alex clings to his ankles until the
					man falls. This triggers laughter among the audience, but it pains
					Alex, and he tries to help the man to his feet. At this point, Brodsky
					calls off the charade, and the man, evidently an actor, bows and
					scurries away. Brodsky explains that all of Alex’s violent impulses
					are accompanied by intense physical distress, and therefore, any
					ill will on Alex’s part ends up forcing him to exhibit good behavior.

He then opens the floor to questions, and an argument
					ensues. On one side, the chaplain criticizes the treatment, claiming
					that it eradicates the possibility of moral choice for the subject.
					On the other side, Brodsky and the Minister defend the treatment,
					stressing its efficacy and usefulness. At a loss, Alex loudly protests,
					“What about me? . . . Am I just to be a clockwork orange?” This
					silences the room, and the men remain quiet for a moment before
					a man unfamiliar to Alex scolds him. The argument erupts again,
					this time about love, but Brodsky uses the topic change as an opportunity
					to present his second case study to the audience. This time a beautiful young
					girl appears. Alex thinks about raping her savagely, but as the sickness
					hits, he finds himself bowing and professing a knightly devotion
					to her in order to escape the pain. With this, the girl bows and
					capers off, as the other men ogle her and Alex feels incredibly stupid
					for responding to such an obvious ruse. Pleased with the success
					of his presentation, Brodsky declares Alex a “true Christian” who
					is “ready to turn the other cheek.” 

Brodsky’s guarantee that Alex will become a “true Christian”
					not only provides insight into the State’s position on religion,
					it also sheds some light on Alex’s status as a martyr. At other
					points in the book, Alex has toyed with the notion of playing Christ.
					Each time, however, he’s always been willing to forsake his identification
					with Jesus for the chance to nail Jesus to the cross. Now, however,
					Alex has become a true—though unwilling—martyr. What may have begun
					as a form of self-flattery has now been wrested from his control,
					as the State forcibly imposes martyrdom upon Alex. After going through
					Ludovico’s Technique, the doctors say that Alex is now “ready to
					turn the other cheek,” an explicit reference to Christ’s Sermon
					on the Mount (found in the Bible’s Book of Matthew.) Alex has become
					a Christian martyr, in the sense that he now exhibits a commitment
					to humility and acceptance, as well as a political martyr, sacrificed
					to the cause of social stability. We’ll see in forthcoming chapters
					that these two things are very much the same. 

The chaplain’s challenge to Brodsky and the Minister serves
					as both a reasonable critique of the State’s new criminal policy
					and religious outlook, as well as an inspiring redemption of the
					chaplain’s character. Earlier, the chaplain’s ambition and inebriation
					leads him astray, as he manages to rationalize Alex’s participation
					in the experimental procedure. Now, however, the chaplain sacrifices
					his career in order to criticize the corrupt doctors, providing
					a rallying point for others who also value free will. As a Christian,
					the chaplain understands behavior as a function of choice, since
					behavior is predicated on an individual’s decision, as an autonomously
					moral being, to perform good acts. 

Thus, while Brodsky claims that Alex, who remained unreformed
					after two years of imprisonment, has now become a “true Christian”
					because he not only does good, but also intends to
					do good, the chaplain rightly points out that Brodsky’s conclusion
					rests on a crucial technicality. Alex’s incapacity to reason morally
					invalidates his intention to do good deeds, since he has ceased
					to be capable of making his own choices. The State has replaced
					Alex’s autonomy with its own decision-making. Alex imagines that
					his consciousness has been infiltrated by an unseen police force
					that patrols his impulses. When he sees the beautiful young woman,
					his first thought is to rape her, until “skorry as a shot came the
					sickness, like a like detective that had been watching round a corner.”
					The introduction of an internalized moral police force isn’t just
					a subtlety, as Brodsky calls it. Choice, not behavior, is the essential
					factor in a Christian moral framework. Thus, Brodsky’s claim that
					Alex has become a “true Christian” represents nothing more than
					a serviceable party line, designed to bolster the State’s image.
					The State emerges as an institution that seeks to perpetuate itself
					by appropriating competing individualist philosophies and forms
					of self-organization, and imprisoning the remaining dissidents.
					As it has already done with youth violence, so it does with Christianity.
					Alex unwittingly alludes to this phenomenon when, in Chapter 6,
					he describes Ludovico’s Treatment with the final line of the “Our
					Father” prayer: “so that I would be sick always for ever and ever
					amen.”

Alex begins to truly understand the significance of his
					“reclamation” when he refers to himself as a clockwork orange. We
					may recall that this phrase was the title of the manuscript Alex
					saw in Part One, in the little cottage where the droogs encountered
					the writer and his wife. The manuscript was a polemic against the
					imposition of “laws and conditions appropriate to a mechanical creation.”
					Those are precisely the kind of laws that have been levied against
					Alex, who has been technologically conditioned to behave in a given
					way, in response to a certain set of stimuli. He is at once organic
					and mechanized, aware of his conditioning but powerless to change
					it. During Brodsky’s two demonstrations, Alex begins to recognize
					the futility of behaving in anything other than a socially acceptable
					manner. Alex has become harmless to society, but he is now also
					helpless in the face of it. This situation doesn’t bode well for
					Alex’s impending release, if the audience’s coarse and gleeful behavior
					is any indication of the world outside prison.

