 The anonymous narrator and protagonist of the novel.
The Underground Man is a minor civil servant living in nineteenth-century
St. Petersburg who has retired completely into what he calls the
“underground,” a state of total alienation and isolation from society.
Severely misanthropic, the Underground Man believes himself to be
more intelligent and perceptive than most other people in the world,
but he also despises himself and frequently feels himself to be
inferior or humiliated. We see all of the events and characters
in the novel from the Underground Man’s skewed perspective.

Read an
                                
                                in-depth analysis of The Underground Man
.
                                


	A
young prostitute whom the Underground Man tries to rescue after
sleeping with her at a brothel. Liza is somewhat shy and innocent
despite her profession, and she responds emotionally to the Underground
Man’s efforts to convince her of the error of her ways. She is naturally
loving and sympathetic, but she also has a sense of pride and nobility.

Read an
                                
                                in-depth analysis of Liza
.
                                


	A
former schoolmate of the Underground Man, the only one with whom
the Underground Man currently maintains a relationship. The Underground
Man sees Simonov as an honest, independent man who is less narrow-minded
than most people. Nonetheless, the Underground Man also suspects
that Simonov despises him and finds his friendship burdensome.

	A
friend of Simonov’s and another former schoolmate of the Underground
Man. Zverkov is a successful officer in the army and well liked
by his friends. The Underground Man hated Zverkov during their school days,
considering him to be coarse, boastful, and stupid. He is also jealous
of Zverkov’s wealth, confidence and popularity.

Read an
                                
                                in-depth analysis of Zverkov
.
                                


 Another
of the Underground Man’s former schoolmates and an admirer of Zverkov.
In school, Ferfichkin was the Underground Man’s “bitterest enemy.”
The Underground Man describes Ferfichkin as impudent, foolish, and
cowardly, and notes that Ferfichkin frequently borrows money from
Zverkov.

 Another
former schoolmate of the Underground Man and a distant relation
of Zverkov’s. Trudolyubov is an honest man who treats the Underground
Man with some degree of politeness. Nonetheless, he considers the
Underground Man to be “nothing” and worships success of all kinds.

	The
Underground Man’s elderly servant. Apollon lives with the Underground
Man and performs household tasks for him somewhat grudgingly. The
Underground Man thinks that Apollon is constantly judging him, and
that he is unforgivably vain. The Underground Man hates the way
Apollon looks and talks.

The head of Underground Man’s department in the ministry.
Anton Antonych is the closest thing to a friend that the Underground
Man has. The Underground Man occasionally borrows money from Anton
Antonych and visits his home on Tuesdays when he has an urge to
be social.

A
military officer who treats the Underground Man dismissively in
a tavern one night, thereby making himself the object of the Underground
Man’s obsessive desire for revenge for several years. The Underground Man
resents the officer for his rank, wealth, physical prowess, and
confidence, but is also intimidated by him for these same reasons,
and therefore can never make a move against him.

