To understand Joan Didion’s character in this, her highly
				personal memoir, it’s important to place The Year of Magical
					Thinking in context with her larger body of work, and to
				understand the public, writerly persona she developed in her earlier
				books and articles.

One of the most respected journalists and writers that
				emerged from the New Journalism movement, Joan Didion became famous in
				intellectual circles for her incisive, thoughtful commentaries on American
				culture and politics. She was unique among her peers for her distinctive
				style. Didion’s prose is pared down, rigorous, and formal—even as
				she addresses complex political and social issues—and often juxtaposes
				seemingly unrelated stories and images. Like many New Journalists,
				she explicitly uses her own voice and impressions of a given situation,
				breaking away from the standard of objectivity that was the hallmark
				of traditional American journalism. She introduces herself as a
				character in her own essays so that her own opinions and ideology
				interact with the objective facts of the story. Still, she strives
				to achieve a balance in her work, engaging with her subjects on
				a personal level while maintaining an emotional distance. Her detachment
				has led many critics to comment that she comes across as chilly
				and distanced in her books and essays.

In contrast, The Year of Magical Thinking gives
				unique insight into Joan Didion’s personal life. More than ever
				before, her private thoughts and emotions are on display. The book
				unfolds less like a traditional, well-structured literary narrative
				and more like memory itself. It is written in a stream-of-consciousness
				style, in which ideas are introduced and repeated, images and memories
				get triggered unexpectedly, and information is processed in real
				time and then integrated into the overall narrative. In this book,
				Didion doesn’t simply tell us how she thinks: she shows us.
				Despite this unexpectedly personal shift in her writing style, however,
				Didion’s inner self continues to remain elusive throughout The
					Year of Magical Thinking. Though she invites the reader
				into her most personal memories and thoughts, the narrative is ultimately
				driven by her reasoned, unemotional analysis of the grief process.
				By taking a highly intellectual approach and sprinkling her cool-headed
				text with deeply personal confessions, she manages to make her memoir
				feel confidential while still keeping herself emotionally distanced
				from the reader.

