In spring, when Charles’s mourning period for his first
					wife has ended, he marries Emma. The wedding is a huge event all
					around Rouault’s farm, and the guests come dressed in fancy clothes
					that they are not used to. After the wedding, they all return to
					the farm in a long and festive procession that stretches out “like
					one long coloured scarf that undulated across the fields.” They
					consume a massive all-night feast that includes an incredibly elaborate
					three-tiered wedding cake. The next day, after the wedding night,
					Charles is obviously overjoyed. Emma takes her loss of virginity
					calmly and coolly in stride. As the couple departs for their home
					in Tostes, Rouault reminisces about the happiness of his own wedding
					day.

Back in Tostes, Emma inspects her new home, where she
					makes Charles remove his dead wife’s dried bridal bouquet from the
					bedroom. As Emma plans further small improvements to the house, Charles
					dotes on her in a daze of love and happiness. Emma, on the other
					hand, feels strangely dissatisfied by her new life—she always expected
					marriage to lead her to romantic bliss. Instead, she feels that
					her life has fallen short of the high expectations she received from
					romantic novels: “Before marriage she thought herself in love; but
					since the happiness that should have followed failed to come, she
					must, she thought, have been mistaken. And Emma tried to find out
					what one meant exactly in life by the words bliss, passion, ecstasy, that
					had seemed to her so beautiful in books.”

Emma remembers life in the convent where she was educated.
					At first, she threw herself into religious life, treating religion
					with the same passion she devoted to reading romantic novels and
					listening to ballads of love. When her mother died, she immersed
					herself even more passionately into her grief. It pleased her to
					think of herself as an example of pure melancholy. But she soon
					grew tired of mourning and eventually left the convent. For a while,
					she enjoyed life on her father’s farm, but she soon found herself
					bored and disgusted with her life. In this state of disillusionment,
					she first met Charles, but he did not provide the happy escape for
					which she had hoped.

Flaubert’s shifting of the point of view from character
					to character follows the pattern of the novel’s plot. After Charles
					marries Emma, her point of view takes over. This shift in perspective
					begins at the end of Chapter V and coincides with the contrast between
					Charles’s blind love for Emma and her own disillusionment. In Emma’s
					meditation on her marital dissatisfaction, we catch our first real
					glimpse of her thoughts, and the stage is set for the escalating
					crisis of personality that will eventually claim her life. 

A third-person narrator tells the story throughout most
					of Madame Bovary, focusing primarily on Emma’s
					thoughts and actions. However, the narrator’s point of view does
					change, and the narrator adopts several different tones. The narrator
					frequently speaks as an outsider, commenting objectively, but also
					shows us things subjectively through the characters’ eyes, telling
					us what they feel and think. Flaubert often employs free indirect
					discourse, a technique in which the narrator’s words sound very
					much like the thoughts and speech patterns of one of the characters,
					even when the narrator is not directly quoting the character. For
					example, when Rouault remembers his wedding in Chapter IV, Flaubert writes,
					“How long ago it all was! Their son would have been thirty by now.
					Then he looked back and saw nothing on the road.” The narration
					moves directly from transcription of Rouault’s thought to description
					of his action, without setting the thought apart in quotation marks.
					As a result, we must often stop to consider whether we are hearing
					the voice of the narrator or that of a character.

	One of Emma’s most important characteristics is the conflict between
					her romantic nature and her tendency toward discontent. Emma’s flashback
					shows how far back her taste for romance extends. Even at age thirteen,
					she was unable to resist the melancholy, romantic atmosphere of
					the convent and steeped herself in romantic novels and songs, whose
					stories she desperately wished would be realized in her own life.
					Emma, however, is easily discontented. Things that she believes
					will save her, such as the convent, the farm, and married life,
					always fail to fulfill her desires. Her high spirits after the wedding,
					for instance, fall the moment she encounters Heloise’s bridal bouquet
					in Charles’s house, and she immediately begins to wonder why her
					life does not match the sentimental fictions she had expected to
					come true.

	Flaubert is often considered a realist writer. Realists
					challenged their romantic predecessors by writing books that focused
					on the details of everyday life without turning a blind eye to their
					dreary aspects. Flaubert participates in this movement by describing
					his characters’ emotions, actions, and settings vividly and without romantic
					or fantastic embellishment. The wedding scene that takes up almost
					all of Chapter IV is a classic example of what makes Flaubert a
					realist. The wedding is a setting that Flaubert describes painstakingly.
					He writes about every part of the celebration, often merely listing
					item after item. He tells what kinds of vehicles the guests arrive
					in, how they wear their hair, what fabrics their clothes are made
					of, and how they appear physically. His description of the feast
					is so elaborate that it seems like there’s far too much food for just
					forty-three guests to eat. Flaubert doesn’t just rattle off details. He
					also implicitly comments on their social value. When he tells us about
					the young girls, “their hair greasy with rose-pomade, and very much
					afraid of dirtying their gloves,” we can see how awkward and unrefined
					they are. In describing the country people’s attempts to dress up,
					Flaubert pokes fun at their efforts.

	Such subtle commentary on the traits of minor characters
					is just one of the ways in which Flaubert frames Madame
						Bovary as a critical portrait of bourgeois life. In Chapter
					VI, he writes that Emma loves the flowers and icons of her religion,
					but that real spiritual faith is “alien to her constitution.” This
					statement shows that Emma, for all her pretensions to great sentiment,
					is really incapable of deep feeling. The narrator’s remark also
					satirizes bourgeois churchgoers who make a great show of religion
					but possess little genuine piety.

