In Orkney, King Pellinore is walking along the beach when
					he comes across Sir Palomides and Sir Grummore trapped on a cliff
					ledge. They are still in costume, and the Questing Beast has fallen
					in love with what she thinks is her mate. She watches them adoringly
					from the foot of the cliff. Pellinore, unwilling to kill the beast,
					holds her by the tail while the two knights make a run for Morgause’s
					castle. They make it safely into the castle, but the beast escapes
					from Pellinore and waits outside for them to exit. Pellinore returns
					to the castle with Piggy, the daughter of the queen of Flanders.
					She tells them that she and the Questing Beast rode the magic barge
					from Flanders to find Pellinore. Their joy at being reunited
					is not shared by the inhabitants of the castle, since it appears
					that the Questing Beast intends to wait outside until what she thinks
					is her mate comes outside.

In his great battle against Lot and the rest of the Gaels
					at Bedegraine, Arthur ignores the knightly rules of war: he attacks
					during the night and attacks the knights directly, ignoring the
					foot soldiers. Arthur’s army is much smaller than the Gaelic kings’,
					but his forces swell when he calls in his allies, two French kings
					named Bors and Ban. The French kings bring their armies to support
					Arthur in exchange for help with their own battles in France. With
					the help, Arthur’s army swiftly defeats the Gaelic army.

Back in Orkney, the Questing Beast continues to guard
					outside the castle. King Lot’s defeated army returns home, and Sir
					Pellinore, Sir Ector, and Sir Grummore are surprised to learn that
					England and Orkney have been at war. Merlyn stops by, looking sleek
					and happy because he has begun a fateful love affair with Nimue.
					The knights ask Merlyn for advice on how to make the Questing Beast
					go away, but Merlyn is troubled because he cannot remember a particular warning
					he wants to give Arthur and can only tell them to psychoanalyze
					the beast. Under the pretense of reconciliation, Morgause makes
					plans to travel to England with her children. As she packs, she
					sinisterly fingers her spancel, a magic tape made of human flesh that
					is designed to make men fall in love with her.

It is why Sir Thomas Malory called his
						very long book the Death of Arthur. . . . It is the tragedy . .
						. of sin coming home to roost.

Morgause, her children, and the English knights make the
					journey to England. King Arthur, who still has fond childhood memories
					of Pellinore, has prepared an extravagant marriage for Pellinore
					and Piggy. Meanwhile, in North Humberland, Merlyn suddenly remembers
					what he has forgotten to tell Arthur: his mother was Igraine, who
					was also the mother of Morgan le Fay and Morgause. Thus, Morgause
					is Arthur’s half-sister, and Gawaine, Agravaine, Gaheris, and Gareth
					are his nephews. Merlyn is too sleepy and muddled to take care of
					the problem immediately, however, and before Merlyn can warn Arthur,
					Morgause uses the spancel and her own charms to get Arthur to sleep
					with her. Nine months later, she gives birth to their son, Mordred.
					The narrator notes that what makes the Arthurian story so tragic
					is that a simple, unwitting mistake by Arthur tears him and his
					dreams apart many years later.

King Arthur’s battle with King Lot is strange since it
					seems to lack a real sense of glory or triumph and appears more
					methodical instead. There is no honor in the way that Arthur wins
					his victory, primarily because he attacks at night, when few of
					his enemies are fully armored. As treacherous as this attack might
					strike us, however, we still want Arthur to win, and his sneakiness
					seems far preferable to the cruelty of earlier wars. Arthur has
					a clear purpose in battling King Lot’s knights; he is not just indulging
					in the thoughtless slaughter of foot soldiers. Because he has a
					mission, we can understand his desire to sidestep the code that
					has made war into a sporting event for so many years. If Arthur
					hurt the weak foot soldiers, he would be acting cruelly. Therefore,
					the fact that the description of the battle feels more bureaucratic
					than military can be read as a sign that Arthur’s vision of glorious
					peace is well under way.

In an interesting footnote, the number of kings participating
					in the battle vividly illustrates why England has been so torn apart
					by civil war. Most of the knights on each side are barons, but a
					number of Arthur’s enemies are also kings. Lot, for example, is
					king of Orkney. So many of Arthur’s enemies call themselves kings
					that the term appears to have lost all meaning for them—one of them,
					the king of the Hundred Knights, does not even seem to have a territory to
					call his own. Our contemporary understanding of the word king is
					of a monarch who controls a vast expanse of land and is the only person
					in the empire who has such a title. In the world Arthur has inherited,
					however, king is a common title, which indicates how many of Arthur’s
					rivals consider themselves so powerful that they answer to no one
					else.

Family ties are generally viewed as an integral source
					of support for a struggling monarch, but Arthur’s seduction by Morgause reveals
					that family can be a source of destruction. Until now, Morgause’s
					connection to Arthur has been murky. There are hints, earlier in
					the novel, that they are related, but White hopes that Morgause’s
					relation to Arthur will be as much of a mystery to us as it is to
					Arthur. We have seen Morgause only as the cruel mother of four unruly
					boys and the seductive hostess of several silly English knights.
					Suddenly, however, she is revealed to be Arthur’s half-sister. This
					news does not bring about a reconciliation between them but rather
					transforms Morgause into a figure of destruction. Although Arthur’s
					reign has barely begun and is yet to see its most glorious years,
					his affair with Morgause is the first step in the reign’s collapse. The
					incest is not intentional, at least not on Arthur’s part, but it
					is a sin so grave that ultimately he cannot escape punishment for
					it. Arthur’s project to build a just and lawful kingdom is doomed before
					it even begins. This tragedy is heightened by the fact that his downfall
					is brought about by his own friends and family. The instruments
					of Arthur’s destruction are Morgause, his half-sister; Agravaine
					and Mordred, his nephews; Guenever, his wife; and Lancelot, his
					best friend.

