Mrs. Ramsay emerges from the novel’s opening pages not
				only as a woman of great kindness and tolerance but also as a protector. Indeed,
				her primary goal is to preserve her youngest son James’s sense of
				hope and wonder surrounding the lighthouse. Though she realizes
				(as James himself does) that Mr. Ramsay is correct in declaring
				that foul weather will ruin the next day’s voyage, she persists
				in assuring James that the trip is a possibility. She does so not
				to raise expectations that will inevitably be dashed, but rather
				because she realizes that the beauties and pleasures of this world
				are ephemeral and should be preserved, protected, and cultivated
				as much as possible. So deep is this commitment that she behaves
				similarly to each of her guests, even those who do not deserve or
				appreciate her kindness. Before heading into town, for example,
				she insists on asking Augustus Carmichael, whom she senses does
				not like her, if she can bring him anything to make his stay more
				comfortable. Similarly, she tolerates the insufferable behavior
				of Charles Tansley, whose bitter attitude and awkward manners threaten
				to undo the delicate work she has done toward making a pleasant
				and inviting home.

	As Lily Briscoe notes in the novel’s final section, Mrs.
				Ramsay feels the need to play this role primarily in the company
				of men. Indeed, Mrs. Ramsay feels obliged to protect the entire
				opposite sex. According to her, men shoulder the burden of ruling
				countries and managing economies. Their important work, she believes,
				leaves them vulnerable and in need of constant reassurance, a service
				that women can and should provide. Although this dynamic fits squarely into
				traditional gender boundaries, it is important to note the strength
				that Mrs. Ramsay feels. At several points, she is aware of her own
				power, and her posture is far from that of a submissive woman. At
				the same time, interjections of domesticated anxiety, such as her
				refrain of “the bill for the greenhouse would be fifty pounds,”
				undercut this power.

Ultimately, as is evident from her meeting with Mr. Ramsay
				at the close of “The Window,” Mrs. Ramsay never compromises herself. Here,
				she is able—masterfully—to satisfy her husband’s desire for her
				to tell him she loves him without saying the words she finds so difficult
				to say. This scene displays Mrs. Ramsay’s ability to bring together
				disparate things into a whole. In a world marked by the ravages
				of time and war, in which everything must and will fall apart, there
				is perhaps no greater gift than a sense of unity, even if it is
				only temporary. Lily and other characters find themselves grasping
				for this unity after Mrs. Ramsay’s death.

