The camp responds to Poseidon’s claim by granting Percy his own private cabin as well as other freedoms, while also assigning him to a world-saving quest. Despite these luxuries of freedom, Percy feels isolated and angered after hearing he is being blamed for his mother’s disappearance back home. That night, Grover encourages Percy to talk with Chiron about accepting the quest and speaking with the Oracle about his destiny. Percy agrees to the quest and Chiron explains why Zeus and Poseidon are fighting. Zeus believes that Poseidon stole his lightning bolt, the symbol of his power. Poseidon denies this allegation and seeks an apology by the summer solstice, the day Zeus also wants his master bolt returned by. If the quest fails, a catastrophic war will be unleashed. Zeus thinks that having Poseidon’s son return his bolt will be a rewarding peace offering. Percy seeks advice from the Oracle and learns that he has to go west and face a god to find the stolen item. The Oracle tells him that along the way, he will be betrayed by a friend and fail to save what matters most. 

Chiron tells Percy that he suspects that Hades stole the master bolt because he was angry that Zeus broke their pact by having another child. He knew that Zeus would blame Poseidon and a war would unfold. Chiron believes Hades also knew Poseidon would claim Percy as his son, so Hades has tried to kill Percy by sending monsters such as the Minotaur before Percy’s quest could begin. Percy is angry that Hades’ desire to kill him caused his mother to disappear and has instilled fear in the rest of the camp. He takes Grover and Annabeth on the journey, so that Grover can get his searcher’s license and Annabeth can fulfill her desire for a quest.

As Percy, Grover, and Annabeth prepare to depart for their quest, Luke gives Percy magical shoes that fly. As a precaution, Percy hands the shoes over to Grover because Percy fears that Zeus will strike him down if he travels through the sky. Chiron gives Percy the ballpoint pen that transforms into a sword, named Riptide. The sword cannot be lost. It cannot hurt any mortal, only monsters, but Percy is reminded that he is susceptible to both mortal and celestial weapons. 

Once in the city, Percy starts thinking about his family. Grover shares with Percy how his mother was protecting him by staying with Smelly Gabe because his scent masked Percy’s scent from monsters. While they are on a bus headed toward the entrance to the Underworld, three old women who look like Mrs. Dodds get on the bus. These women are actually monsters. They are called the Furies. Percy wears Annabeth’s invisible cap and slips past them, hoping that the Furies only want him and will ignore his friends. Instead, the Furies attack Annabeth and Grover. 

While still invisible, Percy spins the bus by taking control of the steering wheel. He pulls the emergency brake and releases the mortals from the bus. Then he takes off the cap and instigates a fight with the monsters, so they will leave his friends alone. Annabeth and Grover help hold the Furies while Percy uses Riptide to turn the first two to dust. As Percy strikes the third Fury, he and his friends escape from the bus just as it bursts into flames. The Mrs. Dodds look-alike calls for reinforcements amidst the flames and the three friends flee into the nearby woods.

Percy has felt alone for most of his young life. Though he previously believed he would feel complete upon learning the identity of his father, isolation grips him once again. Percy feels as if he found his place only to have it ripped from him, leaving him with feelings of despair and loneliness and underscoring the question of his identity. Knowing he is the son of Poseidon changes Percy’s day-to-day routine at the camp, but it does not fulfill his desire for family, friends, or belonging. Being known as Poseidon’s son makes Percy a target for bullying, as the other children take it upon themselves to uphold the relationships the gods have with each other. This challenge is further exemplified when Annabeth stops being kind to Percy, as Athena and Poseidon do not get along. Percy’s identity as Poseidon’s son doesn’t make him feel empowered, only miserable. When Percy has the opportunity to go on a quest, he believes he may earn his right to survive and to solidify his identity. Succeeding on the quest may help him finally find a sense of belonging. 

Friendship, as opposed to the godly lineage that seems so important at Camp Half-Blood, influences Percy’s next steps as he embarks on his quest. His motivations for going on the quest vary from wanting to get the bolt for his own sake and wanting to go to the Underworld to rescue his mother, but people around him affect the way he goes about the quest. Percy chooses to go on the quest with Grover because he knows it will help Grover get his searcher’s license. Although Grover is not the strongest fighter, their friendship motivates Percy to make this decision. Similarly, Percy knows Annabeth has been waiting for the opportunity to go on a quest to prove herself, so he invites her to go with them. Rather than being ruled by logic, strategy, or the gods, Percy illustrates the ways in which he values friendship by choosing to go on a quest with friends, despite the Oracle’s warning that he will be betrayed by a friend. Acting with kindness, instead of considering the god’s own interests, differentiates Percy from the other characters.

The Oracle’s prophecy illustrates yet another device utilized in Greek myth, and also serves to add tension as the story sets up the conflict Percy will soon face. In Greek mythology, demigods have always had to balance being part god and part human, and they are often assigned tasks that the gods could not do because the gods were often unable to navigate the human world as effectively. The Oracle giving the hero a prophecy was used as a way to spur action. In Percy’s world, the gods often use mortals to do their bidding as well, and the Oracle giving Percy a prophecy before he leaves implies that the gods will ultimately manipulate him, too. Furthermore, prophecies in Greek mythology were often unclear. Just like the ancient heroes, Percy must decipher much of the Oracle’s prophecy himself or hope that it will be revealed as he moves forward on his quest.

