Joe and Miss Burden have officially become lovers, though
					still only intimate after nightfall. They go about their separate
					workdays and then meet at night. At one point, their increasingly
					all-consuming sex rituals take the form of games and then making
					love outside on the grounds. With the coming of the fall, their
					relationship enters a new phase, and their passion cools. Joe still
					works at the mill and begins storing and selling liquor at the Burden
					property. He goes to Memphis once a week on business, where he also
					patronizes prostitutes.

Soon, Miss Burden tells Joe that she wants a child. He
					objects, but four months later she announces that she is pregnant.
					Fall turns to winter, and the two lovers no longer see each other.
					One night, a note left on his cot requests Joe’s presence in the
					house. Miss Burden proposes that he take over her job advising the
					staff and students of black colleges. Joe thinks she is mad or affected
					by the pregnancy. He cannot get her out of his mind.

In the meantime, Joe Brown has come to stay with Christmas
					in the cabin. One night, Brown chides Christmas about his affair
					with Miss Burden, and Christmas repeatedly strikes him, chasing
					him off. Beckoned by another note, Christmas enters the house and heads
					directly up the stairs to Miss Burden’s bedroom. He enters to find
					her seated at a table wearing spectacles. She offers to send him to
					a black college and then have him learn the legal trade in her black lawyer’s
					office in Memphis, all in preparation for taking over her affairs.
					Joe is outraged by the suggestion and repeatedly strikes her.

Still, Miss Burden summons Joe again on yet another evening.
					He mounts the stairs, carrying his razor, to find that Miss Burden
					is praying. She attempts to coax him back to God and asks him to kneel
					with her, but he refuses. From beneath her shawl, Miss Burden reveals
					a cap-and-ball revolver; a moment later, she fires. The action suddenly
					skips ahead to find Joe, stunned and inattentive, waving down a
					car, driven by a frightened young man and his girlfriend. Only after
					he gets out miles down the road does Joe realize he has the revolver
					in his hand. After examining the pistol, he realizes that it failed
					to fire when Miss Burden pointed it at him. It contains two bullets,
					meaning that she intended to kill him and then herself.

People begin to gather near the burning Burden home. The
					sheriff has the body of Miss Burden, covered in a sheet, removed
					from the scene. The town’s new fire truck arrives, but there is
					no source of water and thus little that can be done to put out the
					fire. The cabin on the property shows signs of recent occupation,
					and the sheriff cross-examines a black man from the neighborhood,
					assuming that someone from the all-black area is the killer. The
					sheriff beats the man with a belt until he confesses that two white
					men had been the cabin’s most recent occupants. They are soon identified
					as the two Joes, Brown and Christmas.

The sheriff then leaves, leading a noisy caravan back
					to town, pausing only as a wagon stops to let off Lena Grove. He
					breaks the seal on the letter Miss Burden left at the bank to be
					opened after her death and then wires her lawyer in Memphis and
					her nephew in New Hampshire. The nephew responds with an offer of
					a $1,000 reward. Before long, Joe Brown appears
					before the officials in town to try to claim the reward, labeling
					Christmas the killer. The young man who drove Christmas from the
					crime scene in his wagon corroborates this story, telling the sheriff
					what had happened that night. A search party sets off with two bloodhounds
					but cannot turn up the fugitive.

Byron and Hightower, meanwhile, discuss Lena’s fate. Byron wants
					to move her out of Mrs. Beard’s boardinghouse, but Hightower argues
					convincingly that the boardinghouse is probably the best place for
					a young girl in the advanced stages of pregnancy. Byron rebukes
					himself for accidentally revealing Joe Brown’s identity to Lena
					but believes that Lena probably already knew the scoundrel’s checkered
					past.

Lena announces that she wants to go to the cabin where
					Brown has been living and wait for him. Byron plans to tell Brown
					that Lena is there, believing that the news will prompt Brown to
					run. Byron is not quite sure what to do, however, as he thinks that
					Brown might decide to marry Lena if he gets the reward money. Hightower, who
					disapproves of Byron’s plan, hears word that the dogs are hot on
					Christmas’s trail and that capture is imminent. Byron arrives at Hightower’s
					house to tell him that he has installed Lena in the cabin and that
					he is living in a tent close by. Hightower again voices his strong
					disapproval of Byron’s actions but still offers his help to his friend.

Joe Christmas and Miss Burden are bound by a variety of
					similarities, but rather than unite and stabilize the pair, these
					similarities ultimately divide and upend them. Like Hightower and
					Byron, they are outsiders, living on the fringes of a society that
					spurns or ignores them. Both are seen as foreigners: Joe as an enigmatic
					racial presence, Miss Burden as a transplanted Yankee whose liberal
					family politics scandalized the town and resulted in the murder
					of her brother and grandfather. In addition, Faulkner represents
					both characters as fractured and divided, two beings whose fruitless search
					for wholeness and self-unity brings them tragically together.

Whereas Joe’s personal schism is seen through the lens
					of race and biracialism, Miss Burden’s split is expressed in terms
					of gender. At first a distinction is made between their platonic,
					daytime relationship and their sexual life that plays out only under
					the cover of darkness. “It was as though there were two people,”
					Faulkner writes of Miss Burden. Later, over the course of a few
					paragraphs, the double presence that Miss Burden embodies is expressed
					in terms of “a dual personality: the one the woman . . . the other
					the mantrained muscles and the mantrained habit of thinking born
					of heritage and environment with which he had to fight up to the
					final instant.” In this brief passage, Faulkner characterizes not
					only the historical and personal legacy with which his characters
					struggle—the same environmental factors that also forged and influenced
					Joe’s behaviors—but also the self-generated and willful desire for
					power, supremacy, and control that would divide the lovers to the
					end.

Ultimately, it is Miss Burden’s impulse and desire for
					control—and greater clarity—in their relationship that prompts Joe’s
					violent retaliation against any attempt to cage or collar him. Fundamentally,
					Miss Burden does not understand her relationship to Joe, why she
					is drawn to him or why she feels a growing dependence on their intimacy.
					Like Joe, for Miss Burden the bond between them is as unsettling,
					confusing, and personally threatening as it is desirable and difficult
					to resist. As a result, she struggles to find ways to make it more
					defined or tangible, claiming at first that she is pregnant, then
					offering to put him in charge of her affairs. Later, she proposes that
					he attend a black college and then be trained by her lawyer in Memphis,
					with the intent of him ultimately assuming responsibility for her
					legal matters.

These attempts that Miss Burden makes to codify their
					relationship, to nurture and connect emotionally with Joe, provoke
					his ire and set off a chain reaction ending in Miss Burden’s death
					and the burning of her house. Joe feels doubly threatened by her,
					as she displays both feminine intimacy (which he resents, as he
					did with Mrs. McEachern) and a masculine impulse to master and rule.
					Miss Burden is a complex and unresolved presence that Joe, in the
					end, feels he must eliminate rather than attempt to understand.
					As attraction turns to contempt and eventual hatred, Joe derives
					pleasure from the fact that he has corrupted Miss Burden and that
					he uses sex to humiliate and control her. Miss Burden’s guilt at
					her physical and eventual spiritual submission fuels her impulse
					to counsel and improve Joe, much as she does with the constituents
					of the black colleges she advises. Ultimately, Joe sees Miss Burden’s
					actions as a form of patronage and unintended condescension that
					he cannot abide.

