[H]e knew all the time . . . that he
						was in reality not a man, but a wolf of the Steppes. 

Harry Haller’s autobiographical records begin with a typical
					day, which Harry says he passes reading books and experiencing physical
					pain. His days, Harry explains, are mediocre and indistinguishable
					from one another. He passes from mild scholarly endeavors to bodily
					discomforts to the minor delights of a walk or warm bath. Harry
					is so unhappy with all of these experiences that he considers the
					option of escaping by committing suicide.

Harry rages against contentment, healthiness, and comfort,
					all of which he perceives to be part of the optimism of the middle
					class. However, he admits that despite his scorn for the bourgeoisie,
					he feels compelled to live in their midst due to a feeling of nostalgia
					for his bourgeois childhood. Harry talks of his admiration for a
					spotlessly maintained araucaria plant that sits in the stairwell
					of his lodging house. He sees the plant as a window into this bourgeois world
					that he feels now excludes him. When Harry recalls his youth, he
					remembers not a life of bourgeois mediocrity, but frequent moments
					of transcendence and radiant, meaningful joy. However, these divine
					incidents have grown increasingly rare over the years, and share
					nothing at all with the entertainments and occupations absorbing
					the vast mass of modern people. Feeling hopelessly alienated, Harry
					says that he is a Steppenwolf: a beast lost in the multitude of
					human beings, with whom he cannot find happiness or understanding.

	At night, in a mood of discontent, Harry goes out to
					have a drink. As he walks through the rain, he sees over a door
					in an old stone wall a sign that he has never noticed before. Stepping
					reluctantly into the muddy street and crossing it, he reads the
					words  “MAGIC THEATER—ENTRANCE NOT FOR EVERYBODY—FOR
						MADMEN ONLY!” in bright letters fleetingly dancing over
					the wet wall and pavement. The sign disappears without a trace,
					however, and Harry continues on to have a disgruntled dinner in
					his usual tavern, the Steel Helmet.

On the way home, however, Harry finds himself back at
					the wall. He can no longer find a door. A man carrying a tray and
					a signboard passes by. The signboard reads “ANARCHIST
						EVENING ENTERTAINMENT—MAGIC THEATER—ENTRANCE NOT FOR EVERYBODY.”
					This man does not answer Harry’s inquiries about the Magic Theater,
					so Harry attempts to buy an item from his tray. The man hands him
					a little booklet but leaves before Harry can pay him for it. Having
					stepped into the mud, Harry heads home with his feet chilly and
					soaked. When he arrives home, he finds that the booklet, which appears
					to be the sort of shabby leaflet one might find at a fair, is entitled
					“Treatise on the Steppenwolf.” Fascinated, Harry spends the night
					reading the treatise, relaying it to us word for word.

	The Treatise takes the form of a fable or fairy tale,
					beginning, “There was once a man, Harry, called the Steppenwolf.”
					It describes Harry’s feelings and emotions in extremely precise
					detail. It calls Harry a Steppenwolf, one whose human and wolfish
					natures coexist in constant tension. The man-half of the Steppenwolf
					acts in accordance with normality and respectability, while the
					wolf-half sees through the absurdity and vanity of such facades.
					There are moments when Harry’s consciousness flows untroubled between wolf
					and man, and these times provide such miraculous happiness that
					they illuminate all the other periods of darkness and despair. Yet
					in all these respects Harry is not alone: many other men have the same
					conditions of existence, particularly artists and heroes. Such creatures
					vacillate between the conviction that all of human life is a cruel,
					bad joke and the belief that man in some way approximates immortal
					divinity.

	Constantly thinking of suicide, Harry finally designates
					his fiftieth birthday as the day on which he can take his own life.
					Perversely, the thought of a fixed date gives him a sense of freedom.
					He looks forward to that day with eagerness, as it signals the end
					of all his worldly sufferings. According to the Treatise, the Steppenwolf
					distances himself from the bourgeois class by rejecting its social
					conventions. Nevertheless, many aspects of his life are thoroughly ordinary.
					Against this framework, the Steppenwolf can follow either the path
					of the saint by developing his spirit or the path of a profligate
					by pursuing sensual pleasures. Unable to choose, the Steppenwolf
					walks a compromised path between the two. As a result of having
					cut himself free of all conventional attachment, the Steppenwolf
					is utterly liberated but also utterly lonely. 

	According to the Treatise, in order to rescue himself,
					the Steppenwolf must look into his own soul and know himself. The
					Treatise then muses cryptically on some future possibilities for
					the Steppenwolf: that he may come to experience the importance of
					humor, may “get hold of one of our little mirrors,” or may find
					his way to a “magic theater.” After this comprehensive, authoritative
					description of the Steppenwolf framework, however, the Treatise
					criticizes it. It calls the notion of a “Steppenwolf” too simplistic,
					for Harry consists of innumerable souls, not merely two.

With this criticism the Treatise ends. It reminds Harry
					of a poem he wrote in which he described himself as a wolf. He reflects
					that he has two representations of himself, one in verse, one in
					objective prose. Both versions, Harry believes, are correct, and
					both point to suicide if he cannot find a way to break through and
					achieve profound change by deep self-understanding.

Hesse tells Harry Haller’s story from many perspectives
					in order to heighten its realism. We first learn about Harry through
					his landlady’s nephew, whose observations about Haller seem to give
					us the objective truth. We then begin to learn about Harry from
					his own perspective, which gives us access to his inner life. Finally,
					we learn about Harry through the authoritative dicta of the mysterious, seemingly
					definitive Treatise. Because the Treatise employs such phrases as
					“I say,” “even the best of us,” and “this Steppenwolf of ours,”
					it has a personal feel, suggesting that the Treatise’s unknown author
					has a personal connection to Harry.

Much like a court case, these three sources of information
					about Harry Haller corroborate each other, lending credence to Harry
					and his claims. Such corroboration is important since, with the
					appearance of the Treatise, Steppenwolf introduces the first of
					its fantastic, supernatural events. Of course, even with the corroboration
					among different sources, we are not likely to believe everything
					Harry says about the disappearing entrance to the Magic Theater
					and the thoroughly biographical booklet. Yet the narrator’s preface
					prepares us for these fantastic elements by stating that, even if
					not all of its contents are factually true, Harry’s manuscript is
					nonetheless important as a record of a spiritual journey. In this
					way, the novel’s multiple sources neatly comment upon and enrich
					each other.

	Though these different sources support each other, they
					also come into conflict in certain ways. For example, while the
					Treatise has a perfect understanding of Harry’s Steppenwolf dichotomy,
					it insists that the dichotomy is incorrect—Harry, like all people,
					is made up of innumerable selves rather than simply two polar opposites.
					Thus, after Harry has earnestly portrayed himself as a Steppenwolf
					torn between the divine and the bestial, the Treatise deconstructs
					Harry’s idea, critiquing it for being too simplistic. This lesson
					is furthered by the fact that the text itself reflects the principle of
					multiple selves. The very structure of the novel imitates this concept
					of the divided self by breaking itself up into the perspectives
					of several narrators. The split between Harry’s personal record
					and the objective Treatise mirrors the split that the Steppenwolf
					experiences in his own life.

	The power of this section comes partly from the symbolic
					opposition set up in the preface, when Harry reads the passage about
					the divide between life on solid ground (symbolizing the life of
					the bourgeois) and the stormy, unsteady life of water (symbolizing
					Harry’s own life). The water symbolism suggests that Harry is moving
					away from the safety and security of the bourgeois. Harry sees the
					sign announcing the Magic Theater reflected on the wet streets.
					In addition, he is not able to read the sign until he crosses the
					street, which he has been reluctant to do because it is wet and
					muddy. Afterward, Harry describes himself as having stepped squarely
					into the mud, and he points out that his feet are thoroughly wet
					and cold.

These persistent references to water and wetness are consistent with
					the dichotomy of the quote in the preface. Stepping off the solid earth
					of the pavement—literally getting his feet wet—indicates Harry’s
					shift into deeper, more dangerous territory. Moreover, the image
					of water evokes ideas of uncertain suspension, imminent dissolution
					of the self, the danger of drowning, and even the potential for
					a total drenching of the senses—associative meanings that foreshadow
					the actions and patterns of the rest of the novel.

