The oldest daughter of the Bridgerton family. Daphne is one of the most eligible young women in London society circles. Though she wants to marry and have children, she struggles to connect with acceptable suitors, as her easygoing attitude leads most men to see her as a friend rather than a romantic prospect. She is beautiful, intelligent, and outspoken. Daphne is mostly proper though she is not afraid to step outside the traditional female roles established by society and is willing to throw a punch when necessary. Daphne values the love and closeness of her large family and desires a match based on romantic connection rather than necessity. 

The Duke of Hastings and best friend of Anthony Bridgerton. Formerly known as Earl Clyvedon, following the death of his father Simon assumes the title of the Duke of Hastings. Simon is handsome, strong, and quiet. He is viewed as the most eligible match for the young women of London though he has vowed never to marry. Simon is prone to fits of anger and brooding behavior stemming from his father’s rejection of him as a child due to his faltering speech. His anger toward his father has fueled his educational success and eloquence though he sometimes stutters when he is extremely upset. Though he is reputed to be a rake, much of that reputation is based on exaggeration.

The oldest son of the Bridgerton family and best friend of Simon, the Duke of Hastings. Anthony becomes the man of the Bridgerton house following his viscount father’s death. He takes this role seriously, vetting Daphne’s suitors and occasionally allowing her input regarding her potential husbands. Anthony is attractive and physically intimidating. His quick anger is motivated by love and a desire to protect his family.

The viscountess and loving mother of eight Bridgerton children. Like the other Ambitious Mamas of London society, Violet dedicates herself to finding a suitable husband for her daughter Daphne. Unlike most, however, she wants her children to marry for love as she did with their late father. Violet’s kindness and warmth accompany a quick wit and a fierce desire to protect her children.

The third-oldest Bridgerton child who is 18 months older than Daphne. Colin and Daphne have shared a close bond and a tendency for trouble since childhood. Colin is strong and handsome like the other Bridgerton men, though he tends to be more relaxed than his older brothers. Colin enjoys travel and adventure, and he is not yet ready to settle down with a wife. Colin is mischievous and good-natured, though he is also committed to the well-being of Daphne and the rest of the family.

The second-oldest Bridgerton child. Benedict shares the Bridgerton good looks and fierce love of family. He does not enjoy society events, though his respect for his mother compels his attendance, and he is hot-tempered particularly when defending Daphne’s honor. 

The former Duke of Hastings and father of Simon Basset. The Duke of Hastings is an unpleasant and selfish man who cares only for his bloodline and reputation. His rejection of Simon due to his young son’s delayed speech and stutter fuels the younger Simon’s drive to succeed and haunts him until long after the duke’s death.

The author of Lady Whistledown’s Society Papers. Though the character never appears in the novel, her published writings frame the narrative. Her commitment to gossip and her caustic wit can build or crush reputations and enhance or destroy lives. Her true identity is unknown.

