The narrative technique of Episode Fourteen is meant to
					represent the gestation of the English language. The prose styles
					of many different time periods, along with the styles of their most
					famous authors, are replicated and at times parodied in chronological
					order.

	Latinate prose, and then alliterative Anglo-Saxon, situate
					us at the Holles Street maternity hospital, run by Sir Andrew Horne. Bloom
					arrives at the hospital gates, having come to check on Mrs. Purefoy.
					Nurse Callan, an acquaintance of Bloom’s, opens the gate and leads
					him inside. Their conversation about Mrs. Purefoy, who has been
					in labor for three days, is described in moralizing medieval prose.
					The emergence of Dixon, a medical student, from a noisy room down
					the hall is described in medieval-romance style. Dixon, who once
					treated Bloom for a bee sting, invites Bloom inside, where Lenehan,
					Crotthers, Stephen, Punch Costello, and medical students Lynch and
					Madden are boisterously gathered around a spread of sardines and
					beer. Dixon pours Bloom a beer, which Bloom quietly deposits in
					his neighbor’s cup. A nun comes to the door and asks for quiet.

	The men discuss medical cases in which the doctor must
					choose between saving the mother or the baby—Stephen discusses the
					religious aspect of this question while others joke about contraception and
					sex. Bloom is somber, thinking of Mrs. Purefoy and of Molly’s labor
					with Rudy. Bloom considers Stephen, imagining that he is wasting
					time with these men.

	Stephen’s pouring of more beer and consideration of the
					quibbles of Mary’s pregnancy with Jesus are described in Elizabethan
					prose. Punch Costello interrupts with a bawdy song about a pregnant woman.
					Nurse Quigley comes to the door and shushes them. The men’s teasing
					Stephen about the piety of his youth is described in early seventeenth-century
					prose. A thunderclap erupts. Bloom notices that Stephen is truly
					frightened at this evidence of God’s anger, and he attempts to calm
					Stephen by explaining the science of thunder. 

Buck Mulligan’s meeting with Alec Bannon on the street
					nearby is described in seventeenth-century diary style. Alec tells
					Buck about a girl he is dating in Mullingar (Milly Bloom). The two
					men walk together to the hospital on Holles street.

	The good-for-nothing characters of Lenehan and Costello
					are described in the prose style of Daniel Defoe. The subject of
					Deasy’s letter and cattle health is broached. A long, allegorical
					joke ensues about papal bulls, Henry VIII, and England’s relationship
					to Ireland. Buck’s arrival is described in Addison’s and Steele’s
					essay style. Buck jokes about his new occupation as a “fertiliser”
					for all female comers. A side conversation between Crotthers and
					Bannon about Milly, and Bannon’s intent to purchase contraception
					in Dublin, is described in Lawrence Sterne’s style. The men euphemistically
					discuss different contraceptive methods.

	The eighteenth-century style of Oliver Goldsmith follows.
					Nurse Callan summons Dixon: Mrs. Purefoy has borne a son. The men licentiously
					discuss Nurse Callan. Eighteenth-century political prose style is
					used to describe Bloom’s relief at the news of Mrs. Purefoy’s baby,
					and his disgust with the young men’s manner. The satirical style
					of Junius queries Bloom’s hypocritically self-righteous attitude
					toward the medical students.

	Edward Gibbon’s style is used to describe the men’s conversation about
					various topics related to birth: Caesarean sections, fathers who
					die before their wives give birth, cases of fratricide (including the
					Childs murder case, mentioned in Episode Six), artificial insemination,
					menopause, impregnation by rape, birthmarks, Siamese twins. Gothic
					prose is employed to describe Buck telling a ghost story.

	Charles Lamb’s sentimental style is utilized to describe
					Bloom reminiscing about himself as a young man, then feeling paternal toward
					the young men. The hazy, hallucinatory style of Thomas DeQuincey
					manifests the pessimistic turn Bloom’s thoughts suddenly take. Walter
					Savage Landor’s prose style is incorporated to describe how Lenehan
					and Lynch manage to offend Stephen by broaching the topics of his
					fruitless poetic career and his dead mother. Conversation switches
					to the Gold Cup race, then to Lynch’s girlfriend Kitty; we learn
					that Lynch and Kitty were the couple caught by Father Conmee this
					afternoon (in Episode Ten).

	Nineteenth-century historical and naturalist styles follow.
					The conversation turns to the mysterious causes of infant mortality. Charles
					Dickens’s sentimental style is used to describe Mrs. Purefoy, joyous
					mother. 

	Cardinal Newman’s religious prose style is employed to
					describe how past sins can haunt a man. Walter Pater’s aestheticist
					style follows. Bloom ponders Stephen’s aggressive words about mothers and
					babies. Bloom remembers watching Stephen, as a child, exchange reproachful
					glances with his mother. John Ruskin’s style is used to describe
					Stephen’s spontaneous suggestion to proceed to Burke’s pub. Dixon
					joins them. Bloom lags behind, asking Nurse Callan to say a kind
					word to Mrs. Purefoy. Thomas Carlyle’s prose style hails the virility
					of Mr. Purefoy. 

	The narrative breaks into a chaotic rendering of various
					twentieth- century dialect and slang as the men hurry to Burke’s.
					Stephen buys the first round. The Gold Cup race is discussed, Stephen
					buys another round of absinthe, and Alec Bannon finally realizes
					that Bloom is Milly’s father and nervously slips away. The barman
					calls time, and someone gossips about the man in the macintosh in
					the corner. The barman kicks them out as the Fire Brigade passes
					on its way to a fire. Someone vomits. Stephen convinces Lynch to
					come with him to the brothel district. A nearby poster advertising
					a visiting minister (the same ad that Bloom received in Episode
					Eight) inspires a final switch to the style of American sales-pitch
					evangelism. 

The style of Episode Fourteen, one of the most difficult
					in the novel, consists of imitations of chronological stages in
					the growth of the English language, beginning with Latinate and
					Middle English prose up to the chaos of twentieth-century slang.
					The progression of language is, in turn, meant to correspond to
					the nine-month gestation period leading to human birth. The imitations
					of the styles of different time periods and prominent writers seem
					parodic because the styles are somewhat exaggerated (some more so
					than others). The ultimate effect is to drive home the point that
					has been made more subtly in Episodes Twelve and Thirteen: narrative
					style contains built-in ideology that effects what is reported and
					how it is reported. Joyce shows this by allowing each different
					style to gravitate toward its normal subject matter. Thus, the moral-allegorical style
					of John Bunyan explores Stephen’s move away from the piety of his
					youth; Defoe’s passage is spent describing the no-gooders Lenehan
					and Costello; and the sentimental style of Charles Dickens narrates
					the commendably maternal thoughts of Mina Purefoy. The differing
					moral judgments expressed by various styles are also highlighted—Bloom’s
					compassion is venerated in the Middle English prose section, while
					the hypocrisy of Bloom’s disapproval (of the young men) is harshly
					revealed in the satirical prose style of Junius.

	Episode Fourteen, “Oxen of the Sun,” corresponds to Odysseus’s
					visit to the island of Helios in the Odyssey. Odysseus
					warns his men not to touch the cattle that are sacred to Helios,
					but the men slaughter the cattle for food while Odysseus is asleep.
					Zeus avenges Helios—only Odysseus lives, and his voyage home to
					Ithaca is further delayed. Joyce highlights the correspondence in
					part through a host of cattle imagery and mainly through the theme
					of profaning the sacred. Joyce’s Episode Fourteen, which takes place
					in a maternity hospital during the birth of Mina Purefoy’s son,
					concentrates on fertility. The theme of the profaning of the sacred
					is thus represented by the blasphemous discussion of pregnancy and
					birth.

In the larger setting of the maternity hospital, as well
					as the smaller setting of the revelrous gathering of medical students
					and friends, the personal, private, and female aspects of pregnancy
					and birth are obscured, while the social, clinical, political, legal,
					and economic aspects are highlighted. Though their conversation
					centers on mothers and birthing, the young men ignore the off-stage
					travails of Mina Purefoy. Bloom alone respects the sacred quality
					of the birthing hour and remains on the sidelines of the merrymaking.
					The theme of crimes against sacred fertility is highlighted in the
					controversial topic of birth control.

In Episode Fourteen, for the first time, we see Stephen
					and Bloom together in a social situation. The two men are both sidelined
					from the rest of the group. Stephen’s musings on religious doctrine
					are as out of place as Bloom’s sincerity and scientific explanations.
					Both refuse to go home even at this late hour. Bloom is haunted
					by Molly’s actions of the day, while Stephen is haunted by Buck,
					who shows up halfway through this episode, as he did in Episode
					Nine, mocks Stephen’s philosophizing and captures the attention
					of the group for himself. Though Stephen and Bloom are equals in
					their ostracization, we are invited to see them as son and father.
					Bloom’s consciousness is more fully rendered than Stephen’s in this
					episode, and we see that he feels paternal and protective toward
					Stephen. While questions of birth and labor lead Stephen’s mind
					to sacred versions of creation, the same questions lead Bloom’s
					mind to personal memories of his own dead son. A substitute for
					Rudy comes not in the guise of Milly (who is figured in this episode
					as a future mother, not a present daughter), but in the guise of
					Stephen, about whose emotions Bloom becomes increasingly perceptive
					in this episode.

