Daytime, Taneytown, Pennsylvania, a town near
					Gettysburg. Harrison, a Confederate spy, discovers a large mass
					of Union troops moving north. The Union troops are moving dangerously close
					to the Confederate army. Harrison returns in the middle of the night
					to the Confederate camp and reports his discovery to General James
					Longstreet. Longstreet is skeptical at first, but Harrison convinces
					him that he has actually seen the Union troops. Longstreet quickly
					wakes up General Robert E. Lee, commander of the Confederate army.
					Lee is also skeptical, since he has sent General J. E. B. Stuart
					out with his cavalry to keep an eye on the movements of the Union
					army. But Longstreet believes that Stuart is out joyriding. Longstreet
					presses Lee to get the army moving west. Lee agrees, deciding to
					move toward a town called Gettysburg.

Daytime, several miles south of Gettysburg. Union Colonel
					Joshua L. Chamberlain is awakened by Buster Kilrain, a former sergeant who
					was demoted to private after assaulting another officer. Kilrain informs
					him that their regiment, the Twentieth Maine, has just received 120 men
					from the Second Maine, which has been disbanded. The new men are
					mutineers, having expected to be sent home after the disbanding
					of their regiment. The men are now being kept under guard, and Chamberlain
					has orders to shoot any man who does not agree to march. Chamberlain
					is joined by his younger brother, Tom, also a member of the Twentieth
					Maine. Chamberlain obtains food for the mutineers, then meets with
					their leader. The leader tells him that the mutineers are tired
					of the war and the inept Union generals who have been running it,
					and they want to go home. Chamberlain knows he cannot let them go,
					but he also cannot bring himself to shoot them. He tells them his
					predicament, then gives a stirring speech in which he asks them
					to join the Twentieth Maine. All but six men agree.

Michael Shaara has a difficult task in front of him as
					the novel begins. The Killer Angels is generally
					referred to as a “historical novel,” but most historical novels
					are simply set in a certain time period and do not deal directly
					with the actions of people who really existed. For instance, Stephen
					Crane’s classic Civil War novel, The Red Badge of Courage, follows
					a fictional soldier through several battles. The Killer
						Angels is more similar to the historical plays of William
					Shakespeare—Shaara gives a dramatized account of history, using
					characters and events drawn from real life. As such, parts of the
					book, especially the dialogue and the thoughts of the characters,
					are Shaara’s creation, not based on documented history. Shaara based
					his characterizations primarily on the letters and memoirs of the
					soldiers and officers involved in the battle, but there is no way
					of knowing exactly what these officers really thought or said.

	These two chapters introduce three of the
					book’s most important characters: Lee, Longstreet, and Chamberlain.
					The Confederate point of view swings back and forth from Lee to
					Longstreet. Lee is an old man, a gentleman and a classic soldier
					of an earlier era who is brilliant in the type of tactics he was
					taught. Longstreet is something of a visionary, a man who is very
					aware of the changing nature of war as machines and defensive warfare become
					more important. Their differing perceptions of the nature of war
					form the backbone of the difficult relationship between these two
					men. Longstreet adores his commander, and he finds it difficult
					to argue with him. Ultimately, Longstreet always backs down in an
					argument with Lee, because he knows that he could never have the
					support of the army the way Lee does. But Longstreet is stubborn,
					and he constantly tries to convince Lee to fight defensively, encouraging
					Lee to move his troops to a different battlefield rather than fight
					the Union army on terrain that puts the Confederacy at a disadvantage.

	Colonel Joshua L. Chamberlain is practically the only
					Union voice in the novel. Chamberlain is not a general, as are most
					of the major characters on the Confederate side. He is only a colonel,
					the leader of a regiment. There are a number of reasons that the
					novel follows Chamberlain’s point of view when presenting
					the Union side. In the years following the Civil War, it became
					more and more apparent that the war had been decided at Gettysburg.
					It was the high point of the Confederacy, when the Confederate army,
					flushed with success, actually invaded Union territory. If Lee had
					been successful in destroying the Union army or capturing Washington,
					D.C., the North would have had to admit defeat, and the Confederacy
					would have been established as a new country. But the Union won
					the Battle of Gettysburg, and the battle itself was largely determined
					by the Battle of Little Round Top. Holding the extreme left flank
					of the army, Chamberlain led his regiment, which had run out of
					ammunition, down the hillside in a bayonet charge against the Confederate
					forces. The charge succeeded in repelling the Confederates, and
					Little Round Top was saved. As the years went by, the fighting on
					Little Round Top became more and more legendary, and by choosing
					to center on Chamberlain, Shaara focuses on one of the most popular characters
					of the battle.

	Furthermore, the real Chamberlain led a fascinating
					life. He was a professor at Bowdoin College at the time of the war,
					left the college to fight, and distinguished himself as an excellent
					soldier by the end of the war. It was Chamberlain who accepted the
					surrender of the Confederate forces at Appomattox. Chapter 2 establishes
					the contrast between Chamberlain the college professor and Chamberlain
					the soldier. He is an unusually educated and thoughtful man compared
					with many other soldiers. For many, he is the easiest character
					with whom to identify, since he is not only a citizen-turned-soldier,
					but also only a colonel, not a higher-ranked commander or general
					like the other principal characters. In contrast, Lee and Longstreet
					represent heroic, almost mythical figures. Chamberlain, while also
					a source of nostalgic glory, is still a common citizen thrown into
					war.

