Jack finds the Roadway Motel, where Willie Mink is staying.
					He plans to find Willie Mink, shoot him three times in the abdomen, fake
					a suicide note, steal some Dylar, and then drive back to Blacksmith.
					As he drives around the motel three times, Jack becomes hypersensitive
					to the world around him. He sees the entire world anew, paying attention
					to the particular details around him. 

Jack enters Willie Mink’s room, where he finds a shoddily dressed
					man staring vacantly into the television, half out of his mind,
					popping Dylar into his mouth. Willie Mink seems unsurprised by Jack’s
					arrival, apparently because others have come to him in search of
					the drug as well. Willie has not only lost his mind, he has also
					become unable to differentiate between words and the things they
					represent. To torment him, Jack yells “falling plane” so he can watch
					Mink curl into a fetal position as if he were, in fact, in a falling plane.
					Willie Mink refers to Babette as the woman in a ski mask who wouldn’t
					kiss him. 

After hearing that, Jack is ready to kill him. He takes
					out his gun; whispers, “hail of bullets”; and then shoots Willie
					Mink once in the midsection. An arc of blood flies through the air,
					mesmerizing Jack with the intensity of its color. He shoots Mink
					again, steps back from the scene, wipes the gun clean of his prints,
					and places the gun in Mink’s hand. Just before Mink passes out,
					however, he manages to fire the gun’s last bullet into Jack’s wrist. 

Startled back into the real world by the searing pain,
					Jack suddenly sees Mink as human, and a desperate, noble urge to
					save Mink comes over him. He drags Mink out of the motel room to
					the car and performs CPR on him. When Mink comes to and doesn’t
					remember the events in the hotel room, Jack lies and tells him that
					Mink shot both of them. Jack drives to a nearby hospital run by
					German nuns. When Mink is taken away, Jack talks to the nun treating
					his wound and asks her about heaven. Sarcastically, she tells Jack
					that she believes in no such thing and that her real duty lies in
					pretending to have faith for the sake of all the people who have
					none of their own. The nun says something in German that Jack cannot
					understand, but he finds the words beautiful nonetheless. Jack learns
					from the doctor that Willie Mink will eventually be okay, and with
					that knowledge he returns home to watch the children sleep. 

Wilder, after riding his tricycle around the block, rides
					past the dead-end street and carries his bike to the edge of the
					highway. He pedals across both lanes of traffic, stopping only briefly
					to carry his bike over the grassy medium as cars hurtle by, startled
					and confused. 

Jack, Babette, and Wilder go to the overpass more than
					ever to watch the sunsets, which continue to amaze and frighten.
					Jack notes that most people don’t know what to feel when faced with
					these beautiful sunsets. The men in Mylex remain in Blacksmith,
					collecting their data. Jack refuses to talk to Dr. Chakravarty anymore
					or to take calls of any kind. The supermarket rearranges the items
					on its shelves, throwing the elderly into a state of panic and confusion.
				

The final chapters of White Noise manage
					to resolve all the novel’s major plot points while simultaneously
					undermining those resolutions, a fitting conclusion for a book so
					full of contradictions and complications. The gun goes off as it
					must, yet the plan and plot that Jack so carefully mapped out goes
					completely off track. Willie Mink, half out of his mind and already
					ruined, is such a pathetic figure that he fails to be a decent nemesis.
					When Jack finds him, he is glued to a soundless television and dressed
					like a couch potato. Mink has absorbed so much from the TV that
					he now repeats ads and fragments of shows as if he were the television.
					No actual radio or television is necessary to create the white noise
					that haunts the book—Willie Mink produces it himself. He physically
					embodies white noise, and if white noise represents death, then
					Mink is indeed Jack’s enemy. Mink’s inability to differentiate between
					words and the things they represent reflects the blurring of the
					real and the artificial that has characterized the rest of the novel.
					For Mink, no difference exists between the two. The physical experience
					of something and the idea of the thing are one and the same.

Jack has a plan, and, for the first time, he accepts that
					he has a plot. As he has always said and known, that plot is headed
					toward death. He reminds himself of his plan as often as he can,
					although with almost every reminder, the details of the plan slightly
					change. He needs the reassurance of having a plan because his definitive course
					of action gives him energy and courage, yet the plan weakens long
					before it actually fails. Jack stumbles over the details, makes excuses,
					and changes the course of events. When he places the gun in Mink’s
					hand after using only two of the three bullets, we know he’ll be
					shot even before Mink pulls the trigger. The plot, which had been neatly
					packaged and contrived, finally stutters and fails. To kill Mink
					is to effectively kill death, or at least Jack’s fear of it. Once Jack
					is shot and in terrible pain, closer to dying than ever before,
					he realizes that he can’t just let Mink die. The main glitch in
					the plan is humanity. In saving Mink, he feels redeemed and more
					alive than ever. Without death, such a feeling would have been impossible. 

The atheist German nuns who treat Jack and Mink provide
					the final resolution to the events in the motel. Sister Hermann
					Marie, practical to an extreme, has no comfort or answer for Jack
					except to tell him that appearances and illusions are necessary.
					Even a false faith serves a purpose—as if to prove this point, she
					utters something in German that Jack can’t understand. Jack finds
					something beautiful in her incomprehensible litany, and on that
					note he leaves her. The dreaded guttural sounds of the German language
					have been transformed into something beautiful, and Willie Mink,
					the embodiment of Jack’s fears, lies recovering in a hospital room.
					No easy answers or resolutions are possible. Death remains inevitable,
					but life need not be terrible as a result. Wilder’s heroic and absurd
					ride across the highway proves that life can move on even in the
					face of death, and the sunsets, still beautiful and tinged with
					dread, remain as mysterious and sublime as ever.

