Lyra, the protagonist of the trilogy, is the second Eve.
				To Pullman, the original Eve depicted in Genesis was not the cause
				of all sin, but the source of all knowledge and awareness. In the
				universe of the novels, when Eve ate the fruit of the tree of knowledge,
				she became the mother of humanity and introduced Dust into the worlds.
				If Eve hadn’t eaten the fruit, humans would have remained forever
				in a childlike state of ignorance in the Garden of Eden. But this
				is not the dominant interpretation of events because a power-hungry
				Church has taken control of Eve’s story and twisted it to serve
				their own plans. They call knowledge “sin” and try to prevent people
				from learning more and growing wiser and more experienced. They
				think Dust is evil and contrive ways to keep people away from it.
				Lyra, as the new Eve, must fall again in order to restore respect
				for knowledge. She must also pass from childhood to womanhood in
				order to restore Dust, which has been leaking out of the world. 

Lyra Belacqua, whose first name means “lyre” in
				Latin and whose last name means “beautiful water,” experiences a
				sexual awakening over the course of the trilogy. Just as Eve and
				Adam had their first sexual experience after eating from the tree
				of knowledge and leaving innocence behind, Lyra passes from childhood
				to adulthood only after learning about herself and her body. In
				Pullman’s novels, the body is not sinful or dirty, but rather a
				source of beauty and strength. 

Lyra, who is more or less raised as an orphan, has a streak
				of adventurousness that makes her the perfect heroine for Pullman’s story.
				Lyra is hungry for experience. She is rebellious and willful and obeys
				no one unless she thinks she has good reason to do so. Pullman’s
				story about an imposter God and a rebellion against an all-powerful
				Church demands a character as headstrong, adventurous, and strangely
				innocent as Lyra.

