An experience fell to my lot . . . that
						I had never known . . . the mystic union of joy. 

Harry plans to meet Hermine at the Fancy Dress Ball, which
					is a masquerade. He is going without a costume, while she is going
					in a costume she has not revealed to him. That night, Harry goes
					to his old haunt, the Steel Helmet, for dinner. He is filled with
					a sense of nostalgia for his former life, and also a sense that
					he is bidding it farewell. He reflects on the lamentable nature
					of modernity. Harry considers himself to be neither old-fashioned
					nor of the present day, believing he has “escaped time altogether.”
					Since it is still too early for him to go to the ball, on a whim
					he stops off at a cinema and watches part of the Old Testament on-screen.

	Once at the masked ball, Harry is immediately swept up
					in the swirl of festivities. Each part of the Globe Rooms is given
					over to the ball, with dancing in every room, even the basement.
					Everyone at the party is in a good mood except Harry, who is surly
					and aloof because he cannot find Hermine or Maria anywhere. He tries
					to leave, but once at the cloakroom he realizes he has lost the
					ticket for his coat. A stranger whisks by and gives Harry his own
					ticket, upon which are scrawled the words “TONIGHT AT
						THE MAGIC THEATER—FOR MADMEN ONLY—PRICE OF ADMITTANCE YOUR MIND.—NOT
						FOR EVERYBODY.—HERMINE IS IN HELL.”

Harry hurries away to find Hermine, exhilarated once again. Maria,
					in disguise as a Spanish dancing girl, throws herself into Harry’s
					arms. As Pablo leads the band, Harry and Maria dance and kiss, but
					she bids him farewell when she learns that Hermine has summoned
					him. In the room at the party designated as “hell,” Harry sits down
					at the bar next to a young fellow who turns out to be Hermine disguised
					as Harry’s childhood friend Herman. Talking and drinking champagne,
					Harry easily falls in love with Hermine, as she had said at their
					first dinner that he would.

	Harry and Hermine break apart to dance with other women, sometimes
					rivaling each other for the same woman. Harry loses himself in the
					fairy-tale magic of the ball. For the very first time in his life,
					he experiences the sense of absorption in a large crowd, the utter
					dissolution of the self in the collective community that is usually
					only experienced by students and revelers. Harry feels himself Pablo’s
					brother, innocent and released as a child. He notes that he has
					“lost the sense of time.”

Harry is drawn to a woman in a black Pierrette costume
					with a white face. He dances with her, and when they kiss, he recognizes that
					she is Hermine in a new disguise. They dance a climactic “nuptial
					dance.” As the dawn approaches, Harry twice hears an eerie distant
					laughter from above. Pablo, who has been in another room, appears
					and invites both Harry and Hermine to a little entertainment, “[f]or
					madmen only,” with only one price: Harry’s mind. In a little room
					bathed in blue light, the three of them smoke Pablo’s strange cigarettes
					and drink an unfamiliar liquid, which packs an immediate punch.
					Pablo, for the first time articulate and voluble, explains that
					Harry has always desired to penetrate to that realm beyond time,
					but that this world beyond time exists only in his own soul. Pablo
					says that he is now going to make this world of Harry’s soul visible.

In this section Hesse develops the idea of escaping time.
					First suggested by Goethe in Harry’s dream and echoed by Hermine
					just before the Fancy Dress Ball, the idea of being beyond time
					again comes to Harry through a feeling he has during his visit to
					the Steel Helmet. Harry reiterates this sentiment at the height
					of his revelry at the ball, where Pablo, as he prepares Harry for
					the Magic Theater, reinforces it yet again. Although clearly an
					important theme in Steppenwolf, the idea of escaping
					time remains vague and not entirely consistent. On the one hand,
					the theme is connected with the recurrent motif of the immortals,
					geniuses such as Goethe and Mozart who inhabit the space of eternity.
					In her talk with Harry before the ball, Hermine speaks of the world
					beyond time as the place for which she and Harry—those “with a dimension
					too many”—are destined, ostensibly after death. But when Pablo discusses
					the idea of a realm beyond time, he links it with the world of Harry’s
					soul. The novel suggests that the world of eternity exists as a
					possibility only when we die, yet also implies that it is a realm
					of transcendence we carry within us.

	We see Harry’s dramatic change from an ascetic intellectual
					to a passionate hedonist in the changing way he relates to a crowd. Harry’s
					momentary disgust with the wild, crude merrymaking around him demonstrates
					the extent of his change. It is only Hermine’s intervention that
					enables Harry to merge with the crowd, becoming one with them in
					a communal frenzy and fervor.

Harry likens the release he feels when he merges with
					the crowd to the innocence of a child. Hesse draws this idea—the
					child as symbolic of sensual pleasures—from the theoretical systems
					of the nineteenth-century German thinkers Friedrich Nietzsche and
					Emile Durkheim. Nietzsche’s famous work Thus Spake Zarathustra sets up
					a three-part categorization of the spiritual evolution of individuals:
					the third and final stage is that of a child, whose role is to say
					the “sacred yes” in innocence and wisdom. Durkheim’s The
						Elementary Forms of the Religious Life identifies a very
					important mode of social behavior, the carnival, in which all restrictions
					are overturned for a specified time; the carnival serves as a release
					valve for a society’s pent-up, repressed energy. Durkheim notes
					the feeling of “collective effervescence” that occurs when the individual
					at such a gathering feels submerged in a state of union with the
					larger social mass—exactly the feeling Harry has at the climax of
					the ball. Just as it conforms to elements of Durkheim’s analysis,
					Harry’s dissolution in the larger mass signals that he has learned
					the lessons of the Treatise and shattered his sense of himself as
					a singular unit into a thousand different souls.

	As Harry becomes increasingly similar to Hermine, it
					becomes clear that she is nearing the end of her project of teaching
					him. Harry will soon have to kill Hermine according to their original
					agreement. This situation strongly suggests that that Hermine is
					not real but only a reflection of some part of Harry’s self. Hermine’s
					appearance at the ball—so well disguised as “Herman” that Harry
					does not even recognize her—foreshadows her eventual disappearance. Harry
					has described Herman as a boyhood friend, a poet of ecstasy and
					transcendence, without ever mentioning what happened to Herman or
					how such a close friend fell out of his life. By now, we sense that
					“Herman” actually represents the innocent, pure, life-loving part
					of Harry that has been buried and warped by so many damaging years.
					Arriving at the ball in the guise of “Herman,” Hermine unmasks herself
					as a fiction of Harry’s inner self. Hermine unmasks herself because
					she is no longer needed; once recognized as part of Harry, the only
					possible next step is for her to disappear.

