In Emma Bovary, Flaubert uses irony to criticize romanticism
				and to investigate the relation of beauty to corruption and of fate
				to free will. Emma embarks directly down a path to moral and financial ruin
				over the course of the novel. She is very beautiful, as we can tell by
				the way several men fall in love with her, but she is morally corrupt
				and unable to accept and appreciate the realities of her life. Since
				her girlhood in a convent, she has read romantic novels that feed
				her discontent with her ordinary life. She dreams of the purest, most
				impossible forms of love and wealth, ignoring whatever beauty is
				present in the world around her. Flaubert once said, “Madame Bovary
				is me,” and many scholars believe that he was referring to a weakness
				he shared with his character for romance, sentimental flights of
				fancy, and melancholy. Flaubert, however, approaches romanticism
				with self-conscious irony, pointing out its flaws even as he is
				tempted by it. Emma, on the other hand, never recognizes that her
				desires are unreasonable. She rails emotionally against the society
				that, from her perspective, makes them impossible for her to achieve.

	Emma’s failure is not completely her own. Her character
				demonstrates the many ways in which circumstance—rather than free will—determined
				the position of women in the nineteenth century. If Emma were as
				rich as her lover, Rodolphe, for instance, she would be free to
				indulge the lifestyle she imagines. Flaubert suggests at times that
				her dissatisfaction with the bourgeois society she lives in is justified.
				For example, the author includes details that seem to ridicule Homais’s
				pompous speechmaking or Charles’s boorish table manners. These details
				indicate that Emma’s plight is emblematic of the difficulties of
				any sensitive person trapped among the French bourgeoisie. But Emma’s
				inability to accept her situation and her attempt to escape it through
				adultery and deception constitute moral errors.  These mistakes
				bring about her ruin and, in the process, cause harm to innocent
				people around her. For example, though dim-witted and unable to
				recognize his wife’s true character, Charles loves Emma, and she
				deceives him. Similarly, little Berthe is but an innocent child
				in need of her mother’s care and love, but Emma is cold to her,
				and Berthe ends up working in a cotton mill because of Emma’s selfish
				spending and suicide, and because of Charles’s resulting death.

	We can see that Emma’s role as a woman may have an even greater
				effect on the course of her life than her social status does. Emma
				is frequently portrayed as the object of a man’s gaze: her husband’s,
				Rodolphe’s, Leon’s, Justin’s—even Flaubert’s, since the whole novel
				is essentially a description of how he sees Emma. Moreover, Emma’s
				only power over the men in her life is sexual. Near the end of her
				life, when she searches desperately for money, she has to ask men
				for it, and the only thing she can use to persuade them to give
				it to her is sex. Emma’s prostitution is the result of her self-destructive
				spending, but the fact that, as a woman, she has no other means
				of finding money is a result of the misogynistic society in which
				she lives.

