The narrator reminds us of his earlier warning that his History will not
					document every second of time, and that the reader must therefore flesh out the
					time by arriving at his own opinions of the characters. Through a series of
					rhetorical questions, the narrator suggests that he does not need to describe
					the grief Allworthy experienced at the death of Captain Blifil, nor does
					he need to elaborate on the character of Mrs. Bridget Blifil. The narrator
					says that such analysis would be for a lower class of reader, and he expects
					much more from "the upper Graduates in Criticism." Since the narrator knows that
					most of his readers are of superior intellect, he has granted them twelve years
					in which to exercise their skills of penetration. Now he is impatient to
					introduce the novel's hero at fourteen years of age.

Tom Jones, is introduced with an unfortunate anecdote. Tom possesses many
					faults, chief among them being his passion for stealing. Tom has recently stolen
					fruit from an orchard, a farmer's duck, and a ball from the pocket of Master
					Blifil, the son of the late Captain Blifil. Master Blifil abounds in "Virtues"
					and is praised by the neighborhood whereas Tom is despised. Blifil's virtues, in
					a nutshell, are sobriety, discretion, and piety.

The narrator presenta us with a vignette to reveal these boys' opposing
					characters. Tom's only friend is one of the servants of the household, a gamekeeper, and Tom's give the things he steals to this man's family. One day, Tom
					goes hunting with the game-keeper, and, at Tom's bidding, they follow some
					partridges into the estate of Allworthy's neighbor, which Allworthy has
					warned the game-keeper not to do. The neighbor hears the sound of the game-
					keeper shooting one of the partridges and, arriving at the scene of the crime,
					finds Tom with the dead bird, since the game-keeper has leapt into a bush to
					hide himself. The neighbor goes straight to Allworthy and tells Allworthy there
					must have been two people involved because he found two guns. Yet when Allworthy
					asks Tom who his accomplice was, but the boy maintains that he was alone. The
					game-keeper also pleads innocent. Tom receives a flogging from Mr. Thwackum,
					the Reverend whom Allworthy has hired to educate Tom and Master Blifil. Later,
					Allworthy relents and tries to remedy the situation by giving Tom a little horse
					as a present. The narrator predicts that a dinner between Allworthy, Thwackum,
					and a third unnamed gentleman will soon ensue.

Mr. Square, who has been living some time with Allworthy, is introduced.
					Although not naturally intelligent, Square has improved himself through
					education, and is well-read in the ancient philosophers. Square believes that a
					man should always be a speculator and sees virtue as a "Matter of Theory."
					Square and  Thwackum are always arguing, and their only similarity is that
					neither will ever refer to the concept of "Goodness" in arguments. Square
					maintains that human nature is inherently virtuous, while Thwackum believes in
					original sin. Over dinner at Allworthy's table, Square and Thwackum debate
					whether honor can exist independent of religion. Their voices rise in volume and
					anger until something interrupts their debate. The narrator tells us we will
					have to wait until the next chapter to find out the nature of the interruption.

Before continuing his story, the narrator takes it upon himself to rebut the
					arguments of both Square and Thwackum, arguing that neither of them
					should ignore the "natural Goodness of Heart."

The dinner is interrupted by Master Blifil who has a bloody nose from a
					fight with Tom. Tom is smaller, but is by far the better boxer, and Blifil
					has "Tears galloping from his Eyes." Tom explains that he punched Blifil
					after the latter called him a "Beggarly Bastard." Blifil denies this and accuses
					Tom of lying. Blifil reveals that Tom's accomplice in the partridge incident was
					Black George, the game-keeper. Tom pleads with Allworthy to have mercy on
					Black George and his family, and takes full blame for the incident, saying it
					was his idea to trespass. Allworthy dismisses the boys, asking them to treat one
					another more amicably in future.

As usual, Square and Thwackum take Blifil's side, praising him and
					denouncing Tom. Allworthy refuses to let Thwackum beat Tom, but he
					summons Black George and dismisses him from the Estate, albeit with a generous
					severance package. Allworthy's harsh punishment stems from his belief that it is
					worse to lie to save yourself than it is to save another. When the story begins
					to circulate, many people applaud Allworthy's judgment, commend Tom as "a brave
					Lad," and indict Blifil as a "sneaking Rascal."

Blifil has won over Square and Thwackum by always agreeing with their doctrines,
					which means that he has to keep silent when they are together, since their
					teachings always clash. Blifil, young as he is, has also learnt the art of
					"second-hand flattery"—praising Square and Thwackum to Allworthy, who
					goodheartedly conveys all of Blifil's compliments back to the men. Thwackum was
					recommended to Allworthy by a friend, and although Allworthy perceives
					Thwackum's faults, he has faith that Square will balance them out. Square and
					Thwackum despise Tom, who, the narrator admits, is "a thoughtless, giddy Youth,
					with little Sobriety in his Manners." Allworthy, however, allows Tom to call him
					"father."

Both Square and Thwackum are interested in Bridget. The narrator
					says that one may wonder why so many male visitors to Allworthy's house have
					been attracted to Bridget, who is neither beautiful nor young. He then
					elaborates that men "have a Kind of natural Propensity to particular Females at
					the House of a Friend  when they are rich." Both of the men have
					discovered that the easiest way to curry favor with Bridget is to show kindness
					to Blifil and contempt for Tom. Although Bridget flirts with both Square
					and Thwackum, all she truly desires is "Flattery and Courtship," for she does
					not wish to remarry. Square notices, however, that Bridget has hardly anything
					to do with the upbringing of her son, and harbors animosity towards Blifil
					because of the bitter memory of his father. On the other hand, she thrives on
					carrying out Allworthy's plans for Tom's well-being. The neighbors attribute
					Bridget's devotion to Tom to her obedience to her brother, but the narrator
					suggests that the maturing Tom has become attractive to women. Once the
					neighbors realize that Bridget is smitten with Tom, they call him a "rival" to
					Square and Thwackum. Bridget now revels in Tom's company.

As soon as Allworthy realizes that Bridget now neglects Blifil in favor of Tom,
					his relentless compassion for the underdog induces him to protect Blifil. The
					narrator preaches prudence and circumspection, arguing that it is not enough to
					be virtuous inside, and that one must take care to ensure that one's virtue
					shines through to the outside as well. The narrator hails himself as a kind of
					"Chorus."

Half a year has passed since Tom sold the horse Allworthy gave him at a fair.
					When Tom will not tell Thwackum what he has done with the money from the
					sale, Thwackum prepares to beat him. Allworthy walks in and questions Tom in
					private. Tom calls Thwackum a "tyrannical Rascal," and Allworthy cautions him
					against using such language. Tom tells Allworthy he gave all the money from the
					horse to Black George and his family, who have been living in poverty since
					Allworthy dismissed them. Allworthy sheds some tears in appreciation of Tom's
					compassion.

Some time before, Tom sold a Bible given to him by
					Allworthy to Blifil. Blifil has been wielding the book about the house, reading
					from it more than he ever did from his own. Because Blifil flaunts the book so
					much, Thwackum eventually notices Tom's name on the Bible, "obliging" Blifil to
					divulge how he obtained the book. Thwackum condemns Tom's action as sacrilege,
					but Square and Bridget Blifil do not agree.

Squire Western, Allworthy's neighbor, arrives with further accusations
					against Black George head. On an evening walk, however, Tom leads Allworthy and
					Blifil to Black George's abode, where the family's poverty excites Allworthy's
					empathy. Allworthy gives money to Black George's wife for clothes for the
					children. At home, Tom further on the family's behalf, and Allworthy promises to
					support them. Tom runs through the rain to tell them the good news. The narrator
					warns, however, that Black George's fortune is about to take a down turn.

Although Blifil remains mute in Tom's presence, when Tom leaves he recalls an
					incident that occurred about a year after Allworthy dismissed Black George: with
					his family on the brink of starvation, Black George killed and sold a hare to a
					middleman. The middleman was suspected of poaching and, obliged to provide a
					scapegoat named Black George to Squire Western. In telling the story, Blifil
					contorts the facts and says that Black George poached dozens of hares.
					Disgusted, Allworthy promises Tom he will continue to support Black George's
					family, but he does not want to hear Tom mention the game-keeper's name again.

Tom attempts to clear Black George's name by appealing directly to Squire
					Western, with whom he has become friendly through his sporting skills. Squire
					Western, vastly impressed with Tom, now shares his horses, dogs, and guns freely
					with Tom. Squire Western loves his seventeen-year-old daughter, and Tom
					therefore decides to take his appeal to her. However, since this girl is "the
					intended Heroine of this Work," the narrator does not deem it appropriate to
					introduce her at the end of a book. The narrator cautions us that he himself is
					in love with her, and expects many readers to fall in love with her by the end
					of the novel.

Book III charts the maturation of the novel's hero, Tom Jones, from age
					fourteen to nineteen. Although the narrator feigns reserve in Chapter II at
					having to introduce a flawed hero, his admiration for Tom's generosity and
					altruism subtly emerges in the way that he contrasts Tom Jones with his foil,
					Master Blifil. The characterization of these rivals is typical of Fielding's
					characterization throughout the novel: he couches bad characters' vices in a
					favorable light, while feigning a cheeky disapproval of the good characters'
					vices. For example, the narrator makes it clear that Blifil's "virtues" breed
					nothing but a sniveling predilection for tattling. This method of
					characterization results in the narrator developing an ironic stance toward
					Blifil, and the obvious differences between what the narrator claims he wants to
					show of Blifil and what he actually does show creates a rift that works to
					reveal Blifil's hypocrisy.

The narrator does not intend, however, for us to see Tom and Allworthy as
					perfect. Indeed, by calling Tom his "Heroe," he means to reinvent the term, for,
					as he clearly states in Chapter V, he does not "pretend to introduce any
					infallible characters into this History."

The narrator mockingly elevates the small scale of his plot by using
					hyperbolical language. The exaggerated idea of Blifil's tears "galloping" from
					his eyes in Chapter IV underscores Blifil's parochial small-mindedness. In spite
					of his concern for language and terminology, the narrator admits that he prefers
					to show rather than tell, and his use of stage metaphors in relation to the
					writing process underscores his desire to depict scenes rather than states of
					mind. The worthiest characters in the book conform to this style of narration by
					being particularly active: Allworthy and Jones constantly engage in charitable
					actions, while the only action the allegedly pious Square and Thwackum indulge
					in is whipping Tom.
				

