Six years pass. Kay becomes more temperamental, insisting
					on using weapons he cannot handle and challenging everybody to fights
					in which he is invariably defeated. He begins to spend less time
					with the Wart, since the Wart will soon be beneath Kay’s social
					station, though it seems Kay is behaving in this way against his
					will. The Wart is resigned to his fate as Kay’s squire.

Merlyn tells the sulking Wart that the best thing for
					sadness is to learn something new. Merlyn tells the Wart that this
					is the last time he will be able to turn him into an animal, since
					they will soon part ways. Merlyn then turns the Wart into a badger
					and sends him to visit a wise badger. The Wart, however, in his
					foul mood, wanders away from the badger’s lair and comes across
					a hedgehog, whom he threatens to eat.

The Wart eventually returns to the badger’s lair and talks
					to the badger, who tells the Wart a story about how man got dominion over
					the animals. In the beginning, all animals looked like shapeless embryos.
					God offered to alter each of them in three different ways. The animals
					chose things like claws for digging and large teeth for cutting. Man
					was the last embryo to choose, and he chose to stay just as God
					made him. God therefore gave him dominion over the animals and the
					ability to use any tool he wanted. The badger wonders, however,
					whether man has turned his dominion into a kind of tyranny.

When King Pellinore arrives for Kay’s knighting, he brings
					important news: King Uther Pendragon has died without an heir. A
					sword, which has been stuck all the way through an iron anvil and
					into a stone underneath it, has appeared in front of a church in
					London. On the sword are inscribed the words, “Whoso Pulleth Out
					This Sword of this Stone and Anvil, is Rightwise King Born of All England.”
					A tournament has been proclaimed for New Year’s Day so that men
					from all over England can come to try to pull out the sword. Kay
					convinces Sir Ector, Sir Grummore, and Sir Pellinore that they should
					go to the tournament. While they are talking, the Wart and Merlyn
					enter and Merlyn announces that he is leaving.

On the day of the tournament, Kay is so excited that he
					makes the group get up early and go to the jousting area an hour
					before the jousts begin. When he arrives, Kay realizes that he has
					left his sword at the inn, so he haughtily sends the Wart to go
					back and get it. The inn is closed, however, when the Wart gets
					there. In front of a nearby church, he sees a sword stuck in a stone.
					He makes two unsuccessful attempts to pull out the sword. There
					is a sudden stirring in the churchyard, and the Wart sees a congregation
					of his old animal friends. With their encouragement, the Wart pulls
					the sword from the stone with ease. The Wart brings the sword back
					to Kay. Kay recognizes it as the sword that will determine the next
					king of England and falsely claims that he was the one who pulled
					it out of the stone. When Sir Ector presses Kay, however, Kay admits
					that the Wart pulled it out. To the Wart’s horror, his beloved foster
					father and brother both kneel before him, and he tearfully wishes
					he had never found the sword.

The Wart is accepted as king after repeatedly putting
					the sword into the anvil and drawing it back out again. He receives
					gifts from all over England. One day, Merlyn appears magically before
					him. He tells the Wart that the Wart’s father was Uther Pendragon
					and that Merlyn was the one who first brought the Wart to Sir Ector’s
					castle as an infant. Merlyn tells the Wart that from now on he will
					be known as King Arthur.

The Wart’s encounter with the hedgehog is the first time
					that the Wart, in any form, is stronger or more powerful than anybody
					else, and he has his first experience of tyranny in this episode.
					Until now, it has always been in the Wart’s best interests to disagree
					with the concept of absolute power, since he is always one of the
					weakest beings in his world, whether he is a hawk, fish, goose,
					or human. Now that the Wart is finally in a position to bully somebody,
					he seems to be on the verge of indulging the same habits against
					which Merlyn has tried to warn him. When he first encounters the
					little hedgehog, the Wart is not at all hungry, but his general
					chagrin at Kay’s attitude and Merlyn’s departure causes him to threaten
					the little hedgehog with immediate death. Eventually, however, the
					Wart’s innate sense of decency takes over, and he agrees not to
					eat the hedgehog. The episode is played for laughs—the hedgehog’s pathetic
					whines are quite ridiculous—and White does not try to draw too much
					of a moral out of this precursor to the chapter’s main encounter.
					Nonetheless, this encounter reveals the corrupting effect that absolute
					power can have on even the most well-meaning individuals. The fact
					that Arthur is able to resist the lure of power bodes well for the
					many people Arthur soon comes to rule.

The Wart learns a few more valuable lessons during his
					conversations with the badger. As the badger relates his parable
					about how man came to dominate the animal kingdom, he also relates
					the importance of being content with what one has instead of coveting the
					abilities or position of others. This is an important lesson for
					the Wart, who is terribly dejected by the thought that Kay will
					become a knight while he will have to remain a squire. The badger
					also notes, however, that humanity has not handled its responsibilities well,
					and he hints that even unexpected gifts should be handled with caution.
					The freedom to do anything—the kind of freedom that a king of England
					has—must be accompanied by a sense of responsibility to do the right
					thing. The Wart learns that to be a good leader he must make ethical,
					rational decisions that benefit the greater good of his people.
					Like the other lessons Wart learns from his adventures, these lessons
					do not seem to have anything to do with his life right now, but
					they become important when the Wart unexpectedly becomes king.

The events in the narrative of the final chapters occur
					quickly. The story jumps ahead six years; Kay is knighted, King
					Uther dies, Merlyn leaves, and the Wart pulls the sword out of the
					stone and becomes the next king. The previous chapters move at an
					almost methodical pace, paying attention to many seemingly trivial
					conversations and events. It is surprising, therefore, that the
					plot moves at such speed in the final chapters, as these chapters
					include such important events as Kay’s knighting and Arthur’s coronation.
					The rapid pace, however, reflects how sudden and unexpected the
					Wart’s coming to the throne is. The fact that so much changes so
					quickly also seems to indicate that Arthur’s becoming king of England
					will mean huge changes not just for Arthur, but for the country
					as well.

