Stephen walks on the beach, contemplating the difference
					between the material world as it exists and as it is registered
					by his eyes. Stephen closes his eyes and lets his hearing take over—rhythms emerge.

	Opening his eyes, Stephen notices two midwives, Mrs.
					Florence MacCabe and another woman. Stephen imagines that one has
					a miscarried fetus in her bag. He imagines an umbilical cord as
					a telephone line running back through history through which he could place
					a call to “Edenville.” Stephen pictures Eve’s navel-less stomach.
					He considers woman’s original sin, and then his own conception.
					Stephen contrasts his own conception with that of Christ. According
					to the Nicene Creed, a part of the Catholic mass, Christ was “begotten,
					not made,” meaning that he is part of the same essence as God the
					Father and was not made by God the Father out of nothing. Stephen,
					in contrast, was “made not begotten,” in that though he has biological
					parents, his soul was created out of nothing and bears no relation
					to his father’s. Stephen would like to argue the specifics of divine
					conception (are the Father and the Son the same being or not?) with
					heretic-scholars of the past.

	The sea air blows upon him, and Stephen remembers that
					he must take Deasy’s letter to the newspaper, then meet Buck at
					The Ship pub at 12:30.
					He considers turning off the beach to visit his aunt Sara. He imagines
					his father’s mocking reaction to such a visit (his father is disgusted
					by his brother-in-law, Richie, who is Sara’s husband). Stephen imagines
					the scene if he were to visit: Richie’s son Walter would let him
					in and uncle Richie, who has back trouble, would greet Stephen from
					bed. 

	Coming out of his reverie, Stephen remembers feeling
					ashamed of his family when he was a child. This disgust for his
					family brings Jonathan Swift to mind—Swift’s disgust for the masses
					is evidenced in his novel Gulliver’s Travels by
					the noble Houyhnhnm horses and beastly Yahoo men. He thinks of Swift,
					with a priestly tonsured head, climbing a pole to escape the masses.
					Stephen thinks of priests all around the city and of the piety and
					intellectual pretensions of his youth. 

	Stephen notices he has passed the turnoff for Sara’s.
					Heading toward the Pigeonhouse, Stephen thinks about pigeons: specifically, the
					Virgin Mary’s insistence that her pregnancy was caused by a pigeon
					(as recorded in Léo Taxil’s La Vie de Jesus). He
					thinks of Patrice Egan, the son of Kevin Egan, a “wild goose” (Irish
					nationalist in exile) whom Stephen knew in Paris. He remembers himself
					in Paris as a medical student with little money. He remembers arriving once
					at the post office too late to cash a money order from his mother.
					Stephen’s ambitions for his life in Paris were suddenly halted by
					a telegram from his father, calling Stephen home to his mother’s
					deathbed. He thinks back to Buck’s aunt’s insistence that Stephen
					killed his mother by refusing to pray at her deathbed.

	Stephen remembers the sights and sounds of Paris, and
					of Kevin Egan’s conversations about nationalism, strange French
					customs, and his Irish youth. Stephen walks to the edge of the sea
					and back, scanning the horizon for the Martello tower. He again
					vows not to sleep there tonight with Buck and Haines. He sits on
					a rock and notices the carcass of a dog. A live dog runs across
					the beach, back to two people. Stephen imagines the beach scene
					when the first Danish Vikings invaded Dublin. 

	The barking dog runs toward Stephen, and Stephen contemplates
					his fear of the dog. Considering various “Pretenders” to crowns
					in history, Stephen wonders if he, too, is a pretender. He notices
					that the two figures with the dog are a man and a woman, cocklepickers.
					He watches as the dog sniffs at the carcass and is scolded by his
					master. The dog pisses, then digs in the sand. Stephen remembers
					his morning riddle about the fox who buried his own grandmother. 

	Stephen tries to remember the dream he was having last
					night: a man holding a melon was leading Stephen on a red carpet.
					Watching the woman cocklepicker, Stephen is reminded of a past sexual encounter
					in Fumbally’s lane. The couple pass Stephen, looking at his hat.
					Stephen constructs a poem in his head and jots it down on a scrap
					torn from Deasy’s letter. Stephen wonders who the “she” of his poem
					would be. He longs for affection. Stephen lies back and contemplates
					his borrowed boots and small feet that once fit into a woman’s shoes.
					He pisses. He thinks again of the drowned man’s body. Stephen gets
					up to leave, picks his nose, then looks over his shoulder to see
					if anyone has seen. He sees a ship approaching.

There is very little action in Episode Three and only
					one line of dialogue—the chapter consists almost entirely of Stephen’s
					thoughts. Joyce’s scant use of punctuation makes it somewhat difficult
					in Episodes One and Two to distinguish between third-person narrative, interior
					monologue, and dialogue. In Episode Three, the problem becomes not
					how to distinguish Stephen’s interior monologue from all else, but
					how to follow the twists and turns of that monologue itself. Stephen
					is an extremely educated young man—his thoughts therefore flit over
					a host of scholarly texts and several different languages. Episode
					Three also offers a compendium of the symbols we have seen thus
					far, as Stephen’s mind works in the language of symbols from earlier
					in the morning. Thus Deasy’s shell collection, the sea as mother
					from Episode One, and drowned male bodies recur in Episode Three
					and become motifs.

	Thus far this morning, we have seen Stephen in his social
					and professional guises, with smatterings of his private thoughts.
					The more personal nature of Episode Three allows us to sense an
					undertone of suffering (expressed through the recurring themes of
					death, drowning, and decay) in Stephen’s thoughts. The Stephen Dedalus from
					the end of A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man was
					isolated and full of pride. He had ceased to communicate with those
					around him, and was cer-ebrally focused on his artistic coming-of-age
					and Parisian exile. The Stephen of Ulysses is chastened
					by his untriumphant return to Ireland, and has begun to learn the
					error of his ways—he must acknowledge and interact with the world
					around him if he ever wishes to mature as an artist. The beginnings
					of Stephen’s maturation can be seen here in his willingness to be
					critical of his younger self.

	At the beginning of the episode, Stephen briefly considers philo-sophical
					solipsism—the idea that the world only exists in our indi-vidual
					perceptions of it. He rehearses the refutation of this theory—knocking
					his walking-stick against a rock. Despite his practical refutation
					of solipsism, however, Stephen’s attention in the first part of
					the episode is focused not on his surroundings, but on his thoughts
					and on his imaginative recreations of his surroundings. As the episode
					goes on, though, Stephen begins apprehending more and more of his
					physical surroundings—by the end of the chapter we finally have
					a sense, for the first time, of the presence of Stephen’s body,
					as he urinates, touches his rotten teeth, picks his nose, and looks
					over his shoulder. His attentiveness to his own physical presence
					within his surroundings leads him to produce art. He uses the cocklepicker
					as concrete inspiration for a poem involving a female figure. Stephen’s
					artistic maturation will not be accomplished today, June 16, 1904,
					but the direction in which Stephen must continue is laid out for
					us in Episode Three. Leopold Bloom, appearing finally in Episode
					Four, also serves as a model of outward attentiveness in opposition
					to the cerebral Stephen. 

	Episode Three is associated with Proteus, the shape-shifting
					god. Accordingly, the episode is full of transformations of all
					sorts—reincarnation, reproduction, mystical morphing, and material
					change. Stephen sees figures and landscapes around him and shape-shifts them
					in his poetic consciousness—for example, he associates the running
					dog with a bear, a fawn, a wolf, a calf, a panther, and a vulture.
					Transformation, in which one element translates into a new context
					(for example, a soul into a new body), also characterizes the movement
					of Stephen’s thought. His associations and topic-jumps are not always
					logic-based. They often rely on one word or even the sound of a
					word to introduce an entirely new thought into his mind. For example,
					the dog’s morphing into a panther brings to mind Haines’s dream
					about a panther, which then causes Stephen to try to remember what
					he himself had been dreaming about when Haines’s moaning woke him.						

Thus far in Ulysses, we have seen Stephen
					to be concerned with mothers—for example, his own mother’s death,
					the concept of maternal love, and Eve as the original mother. In
					Episode Three, we get Stephen’s first thoughts about fathers, his
					own father specifically, from whom Stephen pointedly distances himself
					here. Kevin Egan, the exiled Irish nationalist, functions as a sort
					of father figure in Episode Three as well. To the extent that he
					is paternal, Egan represents the restrictive pull of fidelity to
					country and to God and to an idealized past—restrictions that Stephen
					would prefer to avoid. Stephen’s actual lack of his mother and his
					willed lack of a father underlies the movement toward an expected
					climax in which Stephen might find surrogate parents in Leopold
					and Molly Bloom.

