In a dark bar, four men discuss the state of the nation’s
					economy. Orren Boyle argues that Rearden Steel has an unfair advantage because
					it owns iron mines, while his Associated Steel does not. Jim Taggart
					agrees to use his influence in Washington to force Rearden to give
					up the mines. Paul Larkin, also at the meeting, agrees to receive
					the mines from Rearden but give the ore directly to Boyle. In return,
					Jim wants Boyle to convince friends on the National Alliance of
					Railroads to force Dan Conway out of Colorado on the grounds that
					his Phoenix-Durango Line offers “cutthroat competition” to Taggart
					in a state where Taggart had operations first. Wesley Mouch, Rearden’s
					Washington Man, is also present. In return for Mouch’s not warning
					Rearden, Jim agrees to find him a bureaucratic post in Washington.
					Their conversation shifts to Mexico, where Jim has built the San
					Sebastian Line. There are rumors that Mexico is going to nationalize
					the line, but Boyle refutes them. He tells Jim that on a recent
					visit, he rode in old, run-down trains. 

Back at the office, Jim confronts Dagny about
					the shoddy trains. She tells him she has removed everything of value
					from the San Sebastian Line to minimize Taggart’s losses if Mexico
					nationalizes the line. They argue about the San Sebastian Line,
					the first major project Jim began after becoming president of Taggart, and
					one Dagny has opposed from the beginning, believing the resources
					were needed on the Rio Norte Line. Jim reminds her that Mexico has
					guaranteed their property rights for two hundred years and argues
					that he built it for the good of the Mexican people. But he also
					built the line in order to reap a huge profit from the nearby d’Anconia
					copper mines. Dagny reminds him that Francisco d’Anconia, formerly
					an industrial genius, has become a worthless playboy in recent years
					and has yet to produce any copper from the mines. 

Eddie Willers enters the cafeteria of the Taggart Terminal.
					He sits, as he often does, with a grease-stained worker. Eddie has
					always liked this worker and feels comfortable with him, although
					he does not know his name. Eddie complains about the decay slowly
					eating the world and the railroad. He has hope, however, because
					Dagny has found a reliable contractor and is going to fix the Rio
					Norte Line. The worker inquires about Dagny’s personal life, and
					Eddie tells him what he knows. He is surprised by the worker’s interest.

Eddie informs Dagny that McNamara, their new contractor,
					has just quit, offering no reasons. No one knows where he has gone.
					The People’s State of Mexico nationalizes the San Sebastian Railroad and
					the d’Anconia copper mines. In his report to the Board of Directors,
					Jim takes full credit for Dagny’s decision to remove the most valuable
					equipment from Mexico before the San Sebastian Railroad was nationalized. 

The members of the National Alliance of Railroads approve
					a proposal known as the “Anti-dog-eat-dog Rule,” designed to reduce
					competition among railroads. According to the proposal, the interests
					of the whole industry are to be determined by majority vote, and
					each company must subordinate itself to the majority’s decision.
					Dagny goes to see Dan Conway, president of the Phoenix-Durango railroad,
					which will cease to exist under the new rule. She urges him to fight,
					but he is too tired and has decided to retire. Dagny had intended
					to compete with him in Colorado, but she cannot stand to defeat
					him in this fashion. She feels like a looter. He tells her to get
					her Rio Norte Line up and running quickly, because the fate of Ellis
					Wyatt depends on it. Ellis Wyatt comes to see Dagny and tells her
					angrily that she must fix the Rio Norte Line at once. He issues
					her an ultimatum. If she does not give him the transportation he
					needs, he will take her company down with him. She tells him that
					he will have the transportation he needs in time. He is surprised, having
					expected excuses and evasion. 

Dagny goes to see Hank Rearden. She tells him about the
					Wyatt meeting and tells him they must rebuild the line in nine months,
					not twelve. He assures her that he will be able to provide what
					she needs. Rearden is surprised and delighted that she deals with
					him on his own level and thinks he has finally met a woman he can
					understand. He tells her that it is people like them who move the
					world and who will ultimately pull it through.

In the decaying world, business is now done in backroom
					bars and involves manipulation and deceit. Instead of trading value
					for value, the looters trade favors. Influence has become a form
					of currency and a basis for decisions that defy logic. As a result,
					the weak profit at the expense of the strong. Taggart lost business
					to Conway’s Phoenix-Durango Line because Conway offered a better
					service, but Conway will lose anyway because of the involvement
					of influence peddlers. Similarly, Boyle will profit at the expense
					of Rearden, although Rearden’s product is far superior. Although
					the overall harm to the industries seems minimal now, this trend,
					if left unchecked, may have grave consequences. In sharp contrast, Dagny,
					Rearden, and Wyatt engage in straightforward and honest dealings.
					For these industrialists, business transactions depend solely on
					mutual self-interest. They buy the best goods at the best prices
					and sell their best products for the highest price they can get. Wyatt’s
					shock at the straight answers he receives from Dagny when he confronts
					her about fixing the Rio Norte Line demonstrate how rare this candor
					has become in an era of evasion and double-speak. 

Jim’s actions reveal the corruption behind the so-called
					altruism of socialist endeavors. He argues publicly that he has
					built the San Sebastian Line to bring service to the Mexican people,
					who have no railroads of their own. In fact, he is motivated by
					the profits he hopes to make from the d’Anconia mines as well as
					by the desire to improve his stature among his Washington friends
					by helping the government appear self-sacrificing in regard to the
					poor Mexicans. Throughout the novel, laws and directives presented
					by the government as protection for a fragile economy contain similar
					hidden motives. Behind them all are looters who stand, not coincidentally, to
					gain in profit and influence. 

Rand’s warnings about the effects of socialism begin to
					build. The book’s characters still regard the nationalization of
					the San Sebastian Line, along with the creation of “People’s States”
					all over the world as a faraway event. For most readers, Communism
					is a similarly remote threat. But Rand had firsthand experience
					with the effects of nationalization and the creation of a Communist
					state, and her hatred of the system is more than just ideological.
					Throughout the novel, threats become more and more immediate. Rights
					are gradually eroded, and individuals give themselves up to the
					group until the government gains control of everything and destroys
					society in the process. The passage of the Anti-dog-eat-dog Rule
					illustrates the mistakes that occur when individuals submit to majority rule.
					Dan Conway knows the rule is wrong, morally and economically, but
					he feels he has no choice but to abide by the majority’s decision.
					In effect, he surrenders his mind to the group and allows himself
					to support the destruction of his own business. For Rand, nothing
					could be worse than the idea that a rational man must subordinate
					himself to an irrational group. 

Some important mysteries are introduced in these
					chapters. We learn that Francisco has been one of the most successful
					businessmen of all time. His endeavors are so successful that Jim
					willingly risks millions of dollars on his unproved mines. When
					Dagny points out that Francisco is no longer the man he was, having
					degenerated from unlimited potential to a playboy’s life of decadence,
					we learn that she has known him well in the past. The questions
					raised for the reader are: Why would such a man choose to squander
					his talents? Why do so many talented men like him continue to disappear?
					Where do they go? Why do they seem to vanish just when they are
					needed most, as did McNamara the contractor? Who is the man Eddie
					dines with in the cafeteria, and why is he so interested
					in Dagny?

