Paul Atreides carries the heaviest burden of all the characters
				in Dune—he is destined to change the course of
				the universe. From the start, we never get a sense that Paul is
				a typical fifteen-year-old boy. Like many other heroes, particularly
				in science fiction, Paul is “the One,” a messiah-type character
				whose arrival people have been anticipating and expecting to bring
				about great change. Throughout the novel, Herbert makes cryptic
				references to the Kwisatz Haderach. Even in the very beginning,
				Reverend Mother Mohiam thinks that Paul may be the Kwisatz Haderach,
				which immediately establishes Paul’s great significance as a character
				in the novel and as a figure within the universe of Dune. 

Paul is different from the other “ones” in science fiction
				because of his steadfast resistance to his destiny and his concern
				about the consequences of power. Paul does not resist because he
				does not believe—he knows he is the Kwisatz Haderach. He resists
				because he can foresee the bloody war that will result throughout
				the universe following his rise to power. The Bene Gesserit have
				arranged for the advent of “the One” because they believe a war
				is the only way to diversify mankind’s gene pool. Paul, however,
				wants to believe there is another way, one that does not cause so
				much suffering and death. 

Paul weaves the path of his destiny by the way he attempts
				to resist it. For example, he does not want to kill Stilgar so that
				he can rise to power. Instead, he creates a new position within
				the Fremen hierarchy so that both Stilgar and himself can be leaders.
				Paul successfully becomes the religious leader of the Fremen. However,
				we always have a sense that he is fighting a losing battle with
				his destiny. Paul feels torn between his allegiances—to the House
				of Atreides, to the Bene Gesserit, and to the Fremen—and his role
				in the intergalactic politics of the Imperium and the Landsraad.
				At the end of Dune, although he helps the Fremen cause and protects
				the Atreides from destruction by the Harkonnen, Paul is nonetheless
				forever trapped in his role as the Muad’Dib. The simple happiness
				he craves with Chani remains unattainable. 

