Christine de Pizan is both the author of and a character in her literary
				creation. She straddles two realms, serving as a bridge between the book’s
				historical and contemporary references and the imaginative world of the three
				allegorical figures and their symbolic city. In addition, her presence
				accommodates and unites the various references that constitute the wealth of
				examples that Reason, Rectitude, and Justice cite as evidence of women’s virtue.
				In stating her case, Christine integrates into her treatise women from history
				as well as fictional characters from legend and mythology. Although Christine
				argues that these seemingly fictionalized presences were based on actual, real
				women, it is her dual status as both authorial presence and literary character
				that allows the real and the fantastic to seamlessly fuse and to form a unified
				and convincing argument. Without her presence, critics may have found her
				scholarship flawed and her citation of fictional lives questionable, thus
				compromising the impact of her words.

Christine assumes another unique pose and fulfills yet another specific
				function in her work. Throughout, she adopts and utilizes what is known as the
				modesty topos, a rhetorical device in which she willfully appears to be more
				ignorant, naïve, or uninformed than she actually is in order to make her various
				points more powerful. Rather than stating that women are virtuous and talented,
				she instead asks the three Virtues if there is any truth to the statements that
				male authors make, maligning and dismissing women’s accomplishments. By casting
				her work in the form of a dialogue (a philosophical debate utilizing a
				question-and-answer format), Christine avoids the charge of shrilly preaching to
				her readers. This approach is more effective: readers can trace her logic and
				see how she arrives at her conclusions rather than simply being told the direct
				result of her contemplations. Ultimately, this self-effacing stance stands out
				against the self-promotion she indulges on several different occasions. In
				answering Christine’s questions, the three allegorical figures often acknowledge
				and cite some of Christine’s other books in what amounts to a brief endorsement
				of the esteemed author’s body of scholarship.

