Iesha tells Mav she needs a break, and he agrees to keep King Jr. for a while. Before Faye leaves for work she reminds Mav that she, his aunt, his grandmother, and their neighbor are only a phone call away, but Mav insists that he won’t need help. While waiting for King to come over, Mav talks on the phone with his father, Adonis, who is in prison. Mav mentions his mother’s friend Moe, and Adonis’ odd reaction to her name throws Mav off as Adonis has never met Moe. When Adonis learns about King Jr., he offers support and suggests that Mav change the baby’s name to something more meaningful. King, who arrives soon after the phone call ends, insists he’s not upset that Mav is the baby’s father. Mav gives his stash of drugs to King, who then leaves.

Dre picks up Mav and King Jr. to take them to a local store owned by Mav’s neighbors, the Wyatts. While driving, Mav assures Dre that he quit dealing, and Dre warns Mav to tell Lisa about the baby before she learns about him from someone else. At the store, Mr. Wyatt, who has heard about the baby, offers Mav a part-time job working in the store and in his garden. Reluctantly, Mav accepts the job. Outside, Lisa’s best friend, Tammy, sees Mav with King Jr. Her eyes widen, and Mav knows he must tell Lisa about King Jr. before Tammy does.

The culture of community and its importance for survival becomes evident as Mav takes on the responsibility of looking after his son without Iesha. Faye’s reminder to Mav that he is not alone and can rely on many people to help him shows that Mav, unlike Iesha, has a strong parent to rely on as well as support from his extended family. This reminder also illustrates Faye’s awareness that Mav’s idea of being a man is tied to pride and stubbornness, which could be a part of the social messaging he received as a child and may prevent him from asking for help. When Adonis calls from prison, it shows how Faye was right about Mav’s network of support, as Adonis immediately steps into his new role as a grandfather when he suggests that Mav rename the baby. Just like Dre, Adonis wants a better life for the baby, and for Mav to realize his strength and capability as a parent. To do so, Mav must first show maturity, live up to his own name, and realize that even independent thinkers must rely on others for support to survive.

The King Lords strongly associate their culture with aggression and toughness, and the gang’s members have an aversion to appearing vulnerable in any way. Mav’s initial reluctance to ask for help illustrates this, as does King’s response to learning that he is not the baby’s father. Though King had a bond with the baby for three months, he hides his emotions and shows no vulnerability or disappointment once he knows he is not the father. Mav avoids speaking with Lisa about the baby because he views himself as being in control of his life and his relationship, even though it’s obvious the situation has left him emotionally unsettled. Mav will need to reconsider the gang’s ideas about manhood to be an effective father, but he is still not ready to make himself vulnerable enough to do so.

The example set by other parental figures is a catalyst for Mav to take more responsibility for his life and the well-being of the baby. In addition to Faye and Adonis, Mav has others he can rely on and learn from. When Dre counsels Mav on the right thing to do regarding Lisa, it shows the maturity Dre has gained from being a father and respectful partner to Keisha. When Mr. Wyatt offers Mav a job, he establishes himself as a mentor by demonstrating his willingness to hire someone with no experience. By taking the comparatively low-paying job at the grocery, Mav shows his unwavering loyalty to his family, including Dre. This loyalty, coupled with his complete respect for Dre, prompts Mav to take the job with Mr. Wyatt and to speak with Lisa about the baby. Mav’s community has expanded, and both actions show that Mav is maturing and has started to recognize the necessity of being responsible and taking advantage of the support that his community provides for him.

