Miss Emma goes to church on Determination Sunday—when church
					members sing their favorite hymns and tell the congregation where
					they will spend eternity. Grant recalls last Friday, when he came
					back from talking to Vivian. He had found Miss Emma and Reverend
					Ambrose sitting with his aunt in the kitchen. Miss Emma asked him
					about his visit to Jefferson’s cell, and he lied and says that Jefferson
					seemed to be doing well and that he had eaten some of the food she
					had sent him. Reverend Ambrose tried to determine whether or not
					Grant intended to teach Jefferson within a Christian framework.
					Reverend Ambrose had visited Jefferson and he wanted to know if
					Grant had been undermining his teachings with cynical secularism.
					Grant became impatient with this line of questioning. After years
					of hard studying in academia, he no longer believes in the teachings
					of the Bible.

	After his aunt returns from church, Grant sits
					at his desk correcting papers. He remarks that, up until his last
					year at the university, he participated in the church. He says that
					studying ate up most of his time and that he became distanced from
					his faith in the church, angering Tante Lou. Professor Antoine told
					him he should leave Bayonne for good, and Grant tried visiting his
					parents in California. Nevertheless, he returned to Bayonne to teach,
					where he cannot escape the influence of the black church. He says
					that he is “running in place, unable to accept what used to be my
					life, unable to leave it.”

	Suddenly, Vivian surprises Grant with a visit to his
					house.

Vivian has never been to Grant’s house before. He gives
					her a small tour and offers her some coffee and cake. She insists
					they wash their plates after eating, even though Grant tells her
					that his aunt would take care of the dishes. He asks her to take
					a walk with him, and she consents. They walk through the plantation,
					past a cemetery, and onto the sugarcane fields. They make love on
					the field, concealed by the cane. Afterward, they discuss possible
					names for their future children, and Grant says he does not want
					to raise his children in this community.

After some time, they return home. Vivian says that she
					hopes Grant’s family will like her. She comes from a light-skinned
					mulatto community called Free LaCove, but she married a very dark-skinned
					man whom she met while attending Xavier University. She kept the
					marriage secret because she knew her family would object. When she
					finally told them, they shunned her and her new family. Even now,
					after her separation from her husband, she never speaks to her family.

	They find Tante Lou, Miss Emma, and others at
					his aunt’s house. Grant introduces Vivian. He insists on making
					coffee because he and Vivian drank it all earlier, but his aunt
					objects, wishing to take charge in her own home. The tension between
					them makes the other ladies uncomfortable. Tante Lou asks Vivian
					about her background and beliefs. Vivian goes to church regularly,
					although it’s to the Catholic church. Tante Lou presses Vivian about
					whether she would drop her religion to marry Grant, the atheist.
					Vivian says she hopes she would not have to do that, but that if
					she had to, she would. Grant quickly ushers Vivian onto the porch.
					Vivian tells Grant that she is happy to know that at least other
					families criticize their children as much as her family does. Grant
					insists that his family differs from hers. Vivian becomes very quiet
					and then says she must go. The ladies say that Vivian is a “lady
					of quality” and encourage her to remain a Christian woman. After
					the interrogation, Vivian leaves gratefully with Grant. They watch
					a black girl and her boyfriend walking home from church holding
					hands. Grant thinks to himself, “Good luck.”

Despite their love for one another, Grant continues to
					neglect Vivian. When they stand on the porch after the initial barrage
					of questions from Tante Lou, Grant shows that he lacks sensitivity
					when he tells Vivian that he considers his family’s reaction “far
					from being the same thing” as the situation between her family and
					her husband. He may not intend to hurt her, but her silence and
					her hasty exit indicates that she takes offense to Grant’s remark.
					At this point, she doesn’t need to feel like an outsider. She needs
					comfort. Recognizing the similarities between their families provides
					her with some comfort, but Grant proves insensitive to her feelings
					by contradicting her. Moreover, Grant never interacts with her children
					and refers to them only as “the babies,” and only when they interfere
					with his weekend plans. He never even mentions their names to the
					reader, despite the fact that he and Vivian discuss the names for
					their future children. Though he loves Vivian, he does not recognize
					the fact that her children have grown up in the community. Instead,
					he plans to leave Louisiana one day, and he wants her to leave everything behind
					and go with him.

	Given Grant’s blindness, and given the fact that Grant’s
					thoughts and actions represent the only point of view in the novel,
					the reader receives a limited picture of Vivian. Like most of the
					other characters in this novel, she seems to have very little significance
					beyond her direct influence upon Grant’s daily life. This limitation
					reveals yet again just how harshly we must criticize Grant and question
					how he relates information. We perceive characters and events through the
					eyes of a single, biased narrator. Even so, Gaines provides glimpses
					of Vivian’s character— her strength and resolve, her critical and
					sensitive nature—when he shows how she reacts critically to Grant
					both in these chapters and in their previous conversations. Ultimately,
					Vivian will confront Grant and burst his self-indulgent bubble,
					further displaying her vivid and powerful emotional life.

	Vivian’s family illustrates how mulattoes displayed prejudice toward
					blacks, but Grant and Tante Lou illustrate how African-Americans
					of strict African heritage often act distrustfully toward mulattoes
					as well, even well-meaning people like Vivian. The ladies description
					of Vivian as a “lady of quality” includes elements of both praise
					and a mild resentment. Tante Lou says, “quality ain’t cheap,” degrading
					Vivian as an object for sale even while she puts her on a pedestal.
					Grant himself shows his resentment toward mulattoes when he tells
					Vivian that his family is “far from being the same thing” as hers.
					Both Grant and Tante Lou allow their defensive stance to affect
					negatively their relationships with well-meaning mulattoes. Recalling
					his description of the bitter Professor Antoine from Chapter 8,
					Gaines again addresses the paradoxical relationship between blacks
					and mulattoes, showing how racism breeds divisiveness within the
					African-American -community itself.

	Grant indicates that his conflict with the church stems
					more from his inner conflict with himself than from a serious critique
					of the church. Gaines does not clarify in the novel whether Grant
					truly believes in a higher power called “God,” but he clearly indicates that
					Grant has little patience for any of the traditional church practices
					in which his aunt finds comfort. As we will later discover, Grant believes
					that the Christian church merely functions to keep black people
					in a subservient state, and that the God worshipped by his family
					and friends, therefore, is nothing more than a white God. However,
					Grant’s statement about “running in place” indicates that something
					inside prevents him from fully extracting himself from his community
					and his church. He feels drawn to his place of birth while simultaneously
					wishing to run away, indicating that he understands to a certain
					extent that his hard-and-fast interpretation of the black church
					as a white tool lacks sophistication. Having distanced himself from
					his community while at the university, Grant cannot see the positive
					values associated with the church.

