Hamilton draws her story of Hercules mostly from later
					writers but also borrows from Greek tragedians. Hercules, born in
					Thebes, is the son of Zeus and Alcmene, a mortal whom Zeus deceives
					by disguising himself as her husband. Hercules’ demi-god status
					allows him many liberties. He can challenge the gods and often win,
					as when he offends the Oracle at Delphi and quarrels with Apollo.
					He also helps the gods defeat the giants with his superhuman strength; above
					all else, he is remembered as the strongest man who ever lived. Only
					magic can harm him, as he overpowers all else. His unequalled strength
					makes up for deficiencies in intelligence and patience—he can be
					impetuous, emotional, and careless, and once threatens to shoot
					an arrow at the sun because it is too hot. Nonetheless, he has boundless
					courage and a noble sense of right and wrong.

Hercules’ strength is evident from his infancy. One night,
					two giant snakes attack him and his half-brother, Iphicles, in their
					nursery, but Hercules strangles them both at once. While still a
					youth he kills the legendary Thespian lion of the Cithaeron woods,
					taking its skin as a cloak he always wears thereafter. In his youth
					he also demonstrates a tragic weakness that haunts him his entire
					life—he rashly and unthinkingly kills one of his teachers, not knowing
					his own strength. After conquering the warlike Minyans, he marries
					the princess Megara. He has three children with her, but then Hera,
					jealous of Zeus’s infidelity with Hercules’ mother, uses magic to
					make Hercules go insane and kill his wife and children. Recovering
					his sanity and seeing what he has done, he rushes to kill himself,
					but Theseus convinces him to live. Knowing he must purify himself, Hercules
					goes to the Oracle at Delphi for advice. She tells him to visit
					his cousin, Eurystheus of Mycenae, who will devise a penance.

Spurred on by Hera, Eurystheus devises a series of twelve
					impossibly difficult tasks. The first of these Labors of Hercules
					is to kill the lion of Nemea, a beast that cannot be harmed by weapons;
					Hercules chokes it to death. Next, he must kill the Hydra, a monster
					with nine heads, one of which is immortal. A new head grows whenever
					one of the other heads is chopped off—a problem Hercules solves
					by burning the neck-stumps and burying the immortal head. In the
					third task, Hercules captures the sacred golden-horned stag of Artemis and
					brings it back alive. The fourth task is to capture a giant boar. The
					fifth, cleaning the stables of King Augeas in a day. The king has thousands
					of cattle whose manure has not been cleaned in years, so Hercules
					redirects two rivers to flow through the stable. Athena helps Hercules
					with his sixth task, which is to rid the people of Stymphalus of
					a flock of wild birds that terrorize them.

All the other tasks involve the capture of things extremely
					resistant to captivity: a beautiful wild bull of Minos; the flesh-eating horses
					of Diomedes; the girdle of Hippolyta, queen of the Amazons; the
					cattle of Geryon; a three-bodied monster (it is on the way to fulfill
					this labor that Hercules balances two giant rocks at Gibraltar and
					Ceuta, on either side of the strait between Spain and Morocco). The
					eleventh task is to steal the Golden Apples of the Hesperides, the
					mysterious daughters of Atlas. Journeying to find Atlas, the only one
					who knows the Hesperides’ location, Hercules stops to free Prometheus
					from his chains. Atlas offers to tell Hercules only if he holds
					up the world—normally Atlas’s job—while Atlas fetches the Apples
					for him. Atlas gets the fruit but decides he prefers walking around
					without the weight of the world on his shoulders. Hercules tricks
					him into taking the earth back, saying he needs to be relieved for
					a moment to place a pad on his shoulders. Finally, for the twelfth labor,
					Hercules has to bring Cerberus, the three-headed dog, up from the
					underworld. Before leaving Hades, Hercules frees his friend Theseus
					from the Chair of Forgetfulness.

Hercules undergoes other various adventures after his
					labors, defeating Antaeus—a wrestler who is invincible as long as
					he touches the ground—and rescuing King Laomedon’s daughter, who is
					being sacrificed to a sea serpent. Hercules also carelessly kills
					several others along the way: a boy who accidentally spills water
					on him and a friend whose father, King Eurytus, insults him. As
					punishment for this last murder, Zeus sends Hercules to be a slave
					to Queen Omphale of Lydia, who forces him to dress and work as a
					woman for a year (though some say three years). Despite his errors,
					Hercules almost always has a clear sense of right and wrong as well
					as the need to make things right. On the way to kill the wicked Diomedes
					(owner of the flesh-eating horses), Hercules gets drunk at the house
					of his friend, Admetus, not knowing that Admetus’ wife has just
					died. When Hercules learns of his friend’s loss, he feels so bad
					about his inadvertent disrespect that he fights and defeats Pluto (Hades)
					to bring Admetus’s wife back from Hades.

One time, however, Hercules refuses to see the error of
					his ways, and this leads to his death. Angered that Zeus had punished
					him for inadvertently killing King Eurytus’s son, Hercules kills
					Eurytus and razes his city. One of his captives is a beautiful girl,
					Iole. Deianira, Hercules’ wife, feels threatened, and recalls some
					magic she earlier acquired, when Hercules shot a centaur named Nessus
					who insulted Deianira. As Nessus died, he told Deianira to take
					some of his blood as a potion to use if her husband ever loved anyone
					more than her. Deianira secretly rubs some of the potion on Hercules’
					robe. When he puts the robe on, pain surges through his body. He
					does not die and must end the agony by killing himself, building
					a giant funeral pyre where he burns himself to death. Ascending
					to Olympus, Hercules reconciles with Hera and marries her daughter,
					Hebe.

Atalanta is the greatest female hero, mostly for her role
					in the Calydonian Hunt—a great hunt for a vicious wild boar Artemis
					has sent to terrorize the kingdom of a king who forgot to pay her
					tribute. A large group of heroes hunts the boar, but it is Atalanta
					who finally causes its death. She first wounds it, and a warrior
					named Meleager, who is hopelessly in love with her, delivers the
					mortal blow. His love for her, however, results in his death. Meleager’s
					two uncles insult Atalanta, so he kills them. In turn, Meleager’s
					mother destroys him by burning the magical log that determines the
					length of his life.

Atalanta has other adventures, most notably beating Peleus, Achilles’s
					father, in a wrestling match. Some say she is one of the heroes
					who search for the Golden Fleece, but that is unlikely. In another
					story she has vowed never to marry but has many suitors. To appease
					them, she agrees to marry anyone who beats her in a race, as she
					knows she is unbeatable. However, a young man named Melanion (or
					Milanion or Hippomenes) defeats her with his wits. He carries several
					golden apples in the race and drops them along the way. Distracted
					by their beauty, Atalanta loses and marries him. At some point they
					both offend Zeus and are turned into lions.

Though Hercules is one of the most famous mythical characters—largely
					due to his colorful and spectacular exploits—he is far from the
					ideal Greek hero. He causes much misery and must endure much suffering
					as a result. On one level, he is a very simple character: strong,
					brave, good-hearted, and not much else. He is unlike the heroes Odysseus,
					Theseus, or even Perseus, who display wit and cleverness along with
					a clear awareness of the places of gods and men; Hercules, however,
					is stubborn, pig-headed, decidedly non-intellectual, and often directly
					challenges the gods.

His story, therefore, is one of constant struggle between
					his noble urges and his weaker impulses. Hamilton notes that the
					secret to Hercules’ heroism lies in “his sorrow for wrongdoing and
					his willingness to expiate it [by which] he showed greatness of
					soul.” His character is brutishly simple, but his story is compelling
					because it is about a hero struggling with himself. At every turn
					in his life, Hercules is his own worst enemy and must suffer to
					correct his errors. After he murders his family—which Hera induces
					and is not necessarily his fault—he essentially imposes the Twelve
					Labors upon himself. As Hamilton notes, his heroism stems from his
					strong sense of morality and his ability to see when he has done
					wrong. Hercules’ refusal to atone for one of his sins—even after
					Zeus has punished him for it—leads to his downfall. His death emphasizes
					that wrongdoing, as well as arrogance against the gods, will be
					punished.

It might seem odd that the intellectual culture of Athens
					would revere such a simple-minded brute. Yet Hercules’ emotional
					struggle is complex and tragic, and it is this aspect of his character
					that the great tragedians explore. Indeed, the most satisfying myths
					are not simple tales of victories over evil but tales of characters
					who encounter and confront the good and evil causes and consequences of
					their actions. Hercules is, on one hand, a superheroic character
					of vast strength and courage. On the other hand, his story, as an
					adventure tale motivated by his tragic missteps, is a very human
					one.

Atalanta may appear in this section on four heroes merely because
					Hamilton desired gender balance. Though a great heroine, her fame
					and adventures are no match for Perseus, Theseus, or Hercules. Her
					presence is nonetheless significant, as it is worth noting that
					the Greek myths do have a tradition of celebrating the female warrior-huntress.
					From the goddesses Artemis and Athena to the human Amazons and Atalanta,
					there are numerous proud, fiercely independent women who are every
					bit equal to men. Though we tend to locate the prototype of a self-sufficient,
					empowered woman as a twentieth-century phenomenon, these myths demonstrate
					its existence at a much earlier date.

