Didion tries to reconstruct the night of John’s death
					and the weeks that preceded it. On December 22,
					after several days of severe flu symptoms, their daughter Quintana
					went to the emergency room with a fever and was diagnosed with the
					flu. The fever persisted, so she returned to the hospital on Christmas
					morning where she was diagnosed with pneumonia and checked into
					the ICU. Her condition then worsened, causing her to go into septic
					shock. She was given experimental drugs, and Didion soon faced the
					fact that her daughter, recently a new bride, was now fighting to
					survive. The doctor was vague about her chances, but Didion had
					to believe that things would improve. Only three months later, at
					John’s funeral at St. John the Divine, Quintana quotes a line from
					a movie, Robin and Marian—“I love you more than
					one more day”—that her father had whispered to her while she lay
					in the ICU. Thoughts of the cathedral set off memories of Quintana’s
					wedding there, as well as memories of Didion’s own wedding at San
					Juan Bautista in 1964.

In the weeks after John’s death, Didion avoids looking
					at the photographs of the early years of her marriage that hang
					in the hallway leading to her room. The pictures set off a series
					of memories about a period in the early 1970s
					when Didion had a close group of friends that frequently shared
					dinners together. By the time of John’s death, several of those
					friends are dead. Didion notes that people who have recently lost
					someone have a certain look of vulnerability on their face. For
					a while she feels invisible and incorporeal, wanting John back.
					Several years before John died, Didion was walking down West Fifty-seventh
					Street in New York when she saw a strange burst of sunlight; at
					the time, she thought it must have been an apprehension of death.
					In a dream some years before, she had seen an ice island, and in
					the dream she knew the island symbolized death. Both images gave
					her a sense of transcendence, rather than dread. Didion wonders
					why she continues to see John’s death as something that has happened
					to her, rather than to him. She
					realizes that she is experiencing self-pity.

John had told Didion that he believed he was dying. He
					had been experiencing a crisis of confidence about his book, which
					was stuck in a limbo between delivery and publication. He had been
					dealing with health issues related to his heart and had had a pacemaker implanted
					over the summer. The success of the pacemaker and Quintana’s wedding
					had buoyed his spirits, but in the fall his mood dropped again.
					She recalls a fight over a proposed trip to Paris, during which
					he claimed that, if they did not go to Paris that November, he would
					never see Paris again. They went, even though this declaration felt
					like blackmail at the time. Shortly before John died, he claimed
					that everything he had done was worthless, a sentiment Didion quickly
					dismissed. The night of his death, John told her, “You were right
					about Hawaii.” She wasn’t sure if he was referring to her suggestion
					from earlier that morning, about renting a house in Hawaii where
					Quintana could recuperate, or if he was making reference to a discussion
					they had had about buying a home in Honolulu nearly thirty years
					before. She preferred to believe the former, but his tone implied
					the latter.

In these chapters, Didion analyzes the shock she experienced
					as she watched the normalcy of her life suddenly erupt into crisis.
					She recreates that experience for us by contrasting the familiarity
					of recent memories and the unfamiliarity of her present circumstances.
					Didion highlights the rapid and sudden changes that occur over a
					relatively short period of time by juxtaposing memories of John
					and Quintana in good health with the more recent memories of John’s death
					and Quintana’s illness. She cuts quickly between these moments to
					recreate the sudden shock of dramatic and overwhelming change, after
					which it is difficult to maintain a steady focus. Especially when
					examined in hindsight, Didion’s tragedies seem all the more inexplicable
					when she compares them to the familiar ordinariness that preceded
					them.

Didion examines apparent clues from John, which seemed
					to indicate that he knew he was going to die, but she has trouble
					recognizing where her thoughts end and his begin. Didion begins
					chapter 6 by describing two memories in which
					she herself anticipated dying. Though she has no problem understanding
					those experiences, she has trouble making sense of the process of
					self-evaluation John went through in anticipation of his own death.
					Didion recognizes that John was going through something highly personal,
					but she doesn’t understand why she can’t relate to his apprehensions
					of death. Her inability or refusal to separate and understand her
					own thoughts and feelings shows not only how intertwined their lives were
					but also how hard she finds it to express her own feelings and reactions
					in any logical way while she grieves.

As the person who tells the story of John’s death and
					Quintana’s illness, Didion participates in a literary tradition
					in which women serve as suffering witnesses to the hardships of
					husband and children. From biblical narratives to Shakespeare to
					contemporary literature, these women are depicted as wise observers
					and passive subjects to their own grief. They empower themselves
					by giving testimony and publicly naming their griefs and, by doing
					so, gain control of their situations. Taken as a whole, The
						Year of Magical Thinking is Didion’s way of giving testimony,
					a method that empowers her to move beyond the role of solitary observer
					to her husband’s death and her daughter’s illness. The book is not
					only a way to memorialize her experience and her memories, but also
					to correct what Didion views as the flawed association between grief and
					self-pity. Didion sees this paradigm as an unfair cultural standard
					that has resulted in a lack of thoughtful, complex literature about
					grief. By refusing to accept what she considers the unhelpful obviousness
					of self-help or inspirational literature, Didion instead creates
					a testament to her own experiences that not only aids her recovery,
					but also creates a model for grief literature that honors the complexity
					of grief.

