Charlie (Charlotte Davis) 

The narrator and protagonist, a teenager on the cusp of adulthood struggling with substance misuse and self-harm. Charlie has endured a tough life, including the suicide of her father, abuse from her mother, the betrayal and near-death of a best friend, sexual violence, and homelessness. Her coping strategy is to self-harm, which lands her first in the hospital and then in a rehab center. She struggles to cope with her emotions, develop healthy relationships, and remain sober. Her frequent lapses in judgment make her a realistic and sympathetic character.  

Read an in-depth analysis of Charlie

Riley West (Irwin David Baxter) 

Former rock star, current line cook at True Grit coffee house, and Charlie’s love interest. Riley has talent but chooses to indulge his addictions rather than develop himself. He and Charlie are drawn to one another with an electric magnetism, but he isn’t interested in a relationship. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Riley

Blue (Patricia) 

Resident at the rehab center and a foil for Charlie. Blue is outgoing, friendly, and has a dramatic flair. She harasses Charlie for not speaking, but Charlie later realizes that Blue uses her toughness to mask and protect her true feelings.   

Read an in-depth analysis of Blue

Ellis (Eleanor) 

Charlie’s best friend from high school. Ellis is cool and beautiful, and she befriends Charlie despite Charlie’s status as an unpopular outsider. When she and Charlie are together, boys always notice Ellis, who is pretty despite the thick, white foundation she wears to conceal her acne. Ellis cuts herself and winds up brain-dead from the blood loss in a different facility than Charlie. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Ellis

Casper (Doc Stinson, Bethany) 

Group therapist at the rehab center. Casper earned her nickname by being slight, quiet, and pale. She is maternal and caring, and she provides guidance to help the girls manage their feelings.  

Charlie’s mother (Misty) 

A mostly absent figure and the foil to Casper, Mikey, and Louisa. Abusive and distant after Charlie’s father’s death, she is one source of Charlie’s trauma. 

Charlie’s father 

A depressed alcoholic who eventually takes his own life. Charlie has fond memories of hiking, cuddling, and listening to music with him, holding those as some of the best moments in her life.  

Mikey (Mike Gustafson) 

One of Charlie’s friends from high school. He and Charlie bond over their love of punk music. Mikey, with his signature blonde dreadlocks, genuinely wants the best for Charlie, but he is unable to help her navigate the many challenges she faces after leaving rehab because he is caught up in his own life.  

Louisa 

Charlie’s roommate at the rehab center. Louisa is beautiful and talented, has long, flowing red hair, and wears vintage clothing. She has been at the rehab longer than any of the other girls and helps Charlie understand how things work. She writes nonstop in her marbled composition books, putting her pain on the page.  

Jen S. (Schumacher) 

A resident at the rehab center. Tall, pretty, and athletic, Jen S. becomes the subject of speculation among the girls after she has is kicked out of the center.  

F****** Frank 

A pimp and drug dealer. F****** Frank looms large as a major source of trauma in Charlie’s life. He runs a drug house and keeps girls in the basement, forcing them to have sex with men for money.  

Evan and Dump 

Charlie’s friends from before she entered rehab. Homeless like Charlie, they protect her from an attacker under the underpass, but they also bring her to F****** Frank’s house because they want shelter and drugs. 

Vinnie 

A day nurse at the rehab center and the first person whom Charlie speaks to. He removes Charlie’s bandages and later gives her extra money and a ride to the bus stop.  

Barbero (Bruce) 

The night nurse at the rehab center. He’s large, sloppy, and has an unrequited affection for Jen S. 

Ariel Levertov 

Mikey’s landlady and an artist who offers Charlie free lessons and takes her to art galleries.  

Julie Baxter 

Riley’s big sister and owner of the True Grit coffee shop. Out of a misplaced sense of love, she supports Riley despite his self-destructive behavior. She’s inept at running the shop and spends a lot of time away at New Age retreats. 

Felix Arneson 

An eccentric artist and Linus and Tanner’s grandfather. He offers practical advice that includes creative and spiritual approaches.  

Linus Sebold 

Server at True Grit and Tanner’s sister. Linus is a recovering alcoholic with an estranged son. She regrets his absence and the way she treated him, and she tries to compensate by treating others kindly.   

Tanner 

Server at True Grit and Linus’s brother. An aspiring EMT, Tanner is supportive and caring. 

Doc Dooley 

Residential doctor at the rehab center who preys on Jen S.’s vulnerability. 

Leonard 

Charlie’s elderly and kindhearted landlord.  

Tiger Dean 

Leader of Riley’s former band who gets the group back together for a benefit concert.  

Tony Padilla 

An artist in Tucson.  

Regan Connor 

A young, talented singer in Tucson.  

