Dinah arrives in Shechem and falls at the feet of Nehesi,
					Re-nefer’s guard. She learns that he saved Re-nefer from death and
					is the only man in the house who survived. Re-nefer blames herself
					for the massacre, since it was she who originally schemed to bring
					Shalem and Dinah together. Re-nefer hopes that Dinah might be carrying Shalem’s
					child, the only link she now has to her dead husband and son. Nehesi,
					Dinah, and Re-nefer sneak away to a port, where a boat takes them
					away from Shechem. At the new moon, Dinah realizes she is pregnant.
					Re-nefer tells her that they will go to her homeland, Egypt, to
					live with her brother Nakht-re. Re-nefer will refer to Dinah as
					her daughter and help her bear her son. She insists that they never
					speak of Shechem or their dead loved ones again. 

Dinah begins to feel her baby stirring within her and
					secretly names him Bar-Shalem, son of Shalem. When it comes time
					for her to deliver the child, she wishes fervently that her mothers
					were with her. The pain is overwhelming. Re-nefer supports Dinah’s
					weight on her knees and helps her breathe. A midwife named Meryt
					appears to assist with the birth. Dinah pushes until she feels she
					will faint. At last Dinah asks for a mirror: seeing the tautness
					of her skin, she tells Meryt to use a knife to create a bigger doorway
					for her son. Meryt cuts her and reaches in to feel the baby’s shoulder
					and pulls the baby out. The umbilical cord is wrapped around the
					baby’s neck. Meryt cuts the cord quickly and blows life into him
					until the baby starts to cry. Dinah holds her baby for the first
					time and cannot stop staring at his beauty before she falls into
					a deep sleep.

When Dinah wakes up her baby is gone. She calls out for
					him, and Meryt calmly tells her that the baby is with his mother.
					Re-nefer arrives and explains that the son Dinah bore is now hers
					and will be raised as a prince of Egypt. Dinah will serve as his
					nurse, and he will know that she gave birth to him. Re-nefer names
					the boy Re-mose, child of Re. Re-nefer tells Dinah that if she does
					not cooperate, she will be thrown out on the street and will never
					see her son again.

At first, Re-mose stays with Dinah day and night while
					she nurses him. After the first few months, they spend most of their
					time in the garden, out of the way of the people in the house. Dinah
					tends the vegetables and herbs in the garden and comes to think
					of it as her second home. Re-mose grows strong and healthy and grows
					very close to Re-nefer and Nakht-re, referring to them as Ma and
					Ba (Mom and Dad). At nine years old, he is old enough to start school and
					learn the trade of a scribe, his uncle’s position. He goes to the academy
					in Memphis, which Nakht-re attended. Once he departs, Dinah weeps,
					for she is alone in Egypt once more. 

While Dinah’s flight to Egypt and confinement are difficult
					for her, she finds Re-nefer’s ban on acknowledging the past to be
					unbearable. Dinah says, “We never again spoke of our shared history,
					and I was bound to the emptiness of the story she told.” Unable
					to properly mourn her husband and family, she cannot come to terms
					with the heinous crimes of her brothers and becomes trapped in a
					living purgatory. Dinah cannot move forward with her life if she
					cannot accept her past. For months, she eagerly looks forward to
					the birth of her son, Bar-Shalem, but she cannot even consider her
					son to be her own once he is born. Re-nefer names him and takes
					him as her son, robbing Dinah of the one link she has to her past.
					Reduced to the role of nursemaid, Dinah takes solace in caring for
					her son but knows that he does not truly belong to her. The fact
					that she can never tell him about his father creates an even larger
					hole in her heart. Time passes slowly for Dinah as she lives out
					the days between her past and her future.

Though Dinah is forbidden to speak or even think of the
					past, she encounters reminders of her history everywhere. While
					her pregnancy gives her hope and a reason to live, it also binds
					her to her past. In her heart, she names her son Bar-Shalem and
					sees her dead husband every time she looks into her child’s eyes.
					Dinah’s relationship with her mother-in-law, Re-nefer, presents
					a sharp contrast to the warm and tender relationships she shared
					with her own mothers. While Re-nefer saves her in Shechem and takes
					her away, in exchange Dinah must negate her past and blot out her
					entire identity. Re-nefer has no desire for a daughter but only
					craves a replacement for her son, so she uses Dinah. As a daughter
					who has always been adored, Dinah finds Re-nefer to be a poor substitute
					for Leah and her other mothers. She finds her living situation jarring,
					for she cannot adjust to the grand house with staircases and servants,
					since she misses the noisy, sprawling family camp. Dinah cannot
					get her footing in her new environment, nor can she accept that
					her life has changed forever.

While giving birth, Dinah discovers new reserves of strength within
					herself. Dinah’s first thought when her water breaks is to call out
					for her mothers. She feels their absence profoundly and misses the
					comfort of the red tent. Though she has Re-nefer, the other women
					of the house, and the midwife Meryt supporting her, she feels utterly
					alone without her true mothers. All of her life, she has dreamed
					of becoming a mother with her family at her side, and finally she
					sees clearly how much she has lost. During her labor, Dinah discovers
					strength in herself that she did not know she possessed. After hours
					and hours of pushing with no progress, she remembers the teachings
					of Inna and Rachel, and she takes over. She instructs Meryt to turn
					the baby, and after she checks her own skin in a mirror, she asks
					to be cut. Despite Re-nefer’s offer for the surgeon, Dinah insists
					that Meryt handle the situation. Dinah’s cool head and natural abilities
					as a midwife enable her to bring her son into the world safely and
					avoid the ever-present death in the labor room. 

