For the remainder of their first year at college, Danny
					and Reuven have no contact with each other, and Reuven is furious
					at Reb Saunders. Meanwhile, Danny’s father has intensified his anti-Zionist activity,
					and tensions increase between the opposing factions at the college.
					Reuven’s pain at losing Danny’s friendship leads him to do poorly
					on his exams. The summer provides little respite: July and August
					are marked by horrible violent events in Palestine, then David Malter
					is forced to cut short the annual vacation in Peekskill to deal
					with pressing Zionist matters. When the new semester begins in September,
					Reuven decides that he wants nothing more to do with Danny Saunders,
					but his resolve is challenged by the fact that he now shares Rav
					Gershenson’s Talmud class with Danny.

	Rav Gershenson is a gentle, wise old scholar. His Talmud
					class is rigorous, and, of course, Danny is his star pupil. Danny
					and Gershenson frequently have lengthy discussions in class that
					remind Reuven of the Talmud sessions he and Danny used to have with
					Reb Saunders. Reuven feels comfortable with the material, and when
					he is called on in early October, Gershenson is pleased with his response.
					But for some reason, Gershenson refuses to call on him again. By
					the middle of October, Reuven is the only student who has not been
					called more than once and he is perplexed.

	In November, the United Nations votes in favor
					of the Partition Plan to establish a Jewish state, and Reb Saunders
					accelerates his anti-Zionist activities. His supporters plaster
					anti-Zionist leaflets all over Hirsch College, and fistfights nearly break
					out among the students. Reuven almost screams at the anti-Zionist
					protestors, but stays silent. As the first semester ends, Reuven
					receives straight A’s—even in Rav Gershenson’s class—and Reuven’s
					father continues to work tirelessly in support of the UN decision.
					During Reuven’s winter break, his father collapses at a Jewish National
					Fund meeting, suffering a second heart attack. In school, Danny
					brushes up against Reuven in a gesture of sympathy, but remains
					unable to speak to him.

	David Malter is hospitalized for over a month, and Reuven
					lives at home alone, feeling incredibly lonely. He deals with the
					newfound silence in his apartment by diving ferociously into his
					Talmudic studies. Although Gershenson has not called on him for
					several months, he becomes convinced that he will be called upon
					for one particularly difficult passage that none of the students
					can understand, so he prepares an especially intense analysis.

	As Reuven expected, Rav Gershenson finally
					calls on him to clarify the difficult passage, and Reuven finds
					himself dominating the class for several days. Although he has figured
					out how to apply his father’s critical methods to resolve the text’s
					internal contradictions, he refrains from employing these controversial methods
					in front of the class because he thinks that Rav Gershenson would
					not approve. Instead, he gives an extraordinarily thorough interpretation
					using traditional methods like the ones Reb Saunders would use with
					Danny. 

After class, Rav Gershenson detains Reuven and asks him
					how his father might have resolved the passage’s contradictions.
					Reuven explains how his father would have reconstructed the text
					to make sense of it. Rav Gershenson is clearly impressed and praises
					both Reuven and his father. He says that he is not personally opposed
					to these controversial techniques but tells Reuven that he must
					never use them in his class. Afterward, Reuven looks for Rav Gershenson’s
					name in the school library’s card catalog, but does not find it. He
					realizes that Gershenson cannot publish, because if he expressed his
					belief in controversial Talmud scholarship, he would not be allowed
					to teach at the conservative college. Reuven realizes that his father’s
					controversial writings are the reason he is not teaching at Hirsch,
					even though he is a brilliant scholar.

In this chapter, Reuven has neither Danny nor Reb Saunders
					in his life, and after his father’s heart attack, he feels entirely
					alone. Rav Gershenson functions as a substitute for all these characters,
					filling a void in Reuven’s life. Therefore, by observing Rav Gershenson
					and what he means to Reuven, we get a better sense of what Reb Saunders,
					Danny Saunders, and Reuven’s father mean to Reuven.

	Since he is Reuven’s Talmud teacher, Rav Gershenson functions most
					obviously as a surrogate for Reb Saunders. In Rav Gershenson’s class,
					Reuven is given insight into the Talmud, which he loves, and he
					is indirectly able to interact with Danny. Like Reb Saunders, Rav
					Gershenson uses silence as a tool of instruction. Yet Rav Gershenson’s
					silence seems different from Reb Saunders’s harsh refusal to speak
					to Danny. Rav Gershenson’s silence is gentle, it occurs in the context
					of classroom learning, and it serves to highlight a student’s lack
					of knowledge.

	Rav Gershenson’s patient, loving approach to learning
					also echoes David Malter’s education of Reuven. Reuven himself makes
					this connection, commenting, “he taught Talmud the way my father did.”
					After his father’s heart attack, Reuven finds solace in his Talmudic
					studies. Studying for Rav Gershenson helps Reuven feel connected
					to his father, as he applies, celebrates, and reaps the rewards of
					his father’s patient teachings.

	More subtly, Rav Gershenson’s class serves as a substitute
					for Danny in Reuven’s life. We understand exactly what Danny means to
					Reuven by learning how Reuven compensates for his absence. Danny
					has given Reuven a new perspective. Through Danny, Reuven has crossed
					into a world so similar to, yet so different from, the world where
					he always felt comfortable. Danny has broadened Reuven’s worldview
					and enabled Reuven to look at the world from multiple viewpoints.
					In Reuven’s Talmudic study, we see how Reuven’s relationship with
					Danny has initiated Reuven’s maturation. Reuven says, “I worked
					carefully and methodically, using everything my father had taught
					me and a lot of things I now was able to teach myself.” His father
					taught him the tools to learn far beyond the bounds of his upbringing,
					and Danny is the one who showed Reuven other ways of studying the
					Talmud.

The strength of Reuven’s analysis, which impresses Rav
					Gershenson, is its breadth the multiplicity of voices he includes.
					Reuven learned depth from his father, but from Danny, he learned
					to approach a problem from several different perspectives. In the
					end, Reuven does not even use his father’s methodology during his
					in-class explication, but instead uses Reb Saunders’s approach.
					From the start of his friendship with Danny, Reuven learned to look beyond
					superficial appearances, doubt his initial impressions, and search
					for multiple ways of looking at a situation. In Rav Gershenson’s
					class, we see how these lessons have impacted Reuven’s life.

	Throughout the novel, Reuven criticizes Reb Saunder’s
					silent treatment of Danny. He also finds unbearable the silence
					Reb Saunders has imposed between Reuven and Danny. At the beginning
					of this chapter, Reuven says that he frequently met eyes with Danny, “but
					[their] lips exchanged nothing.” This comment implies the pain Danny’s
					silence is causing Reuven, and it also suggests that Reuven believes
					wordless interactions are meaningless. Yet the silence Reuven experiences
					throughout this entire chapter results in his most accomplished
					scholarship. Also, after Reuven restrains himself from shouting
					at the anti-Zionists, he says, “I was grateful for that silence.”
					He sees that words as well as silence can hurt and cause suffering,
					and he is glad that he restrained himself. Reuven is growing to
					understand that the difference between silence and speech is not
					as clear-cut as he initially believed.

