The central character of the story as well as its narrator, Amir has a
                privileged upbringing. His father, Baba, is rich by Afghan standards, and as a
                result, Amir grows up accustomed to having what he wants. The only thing he feels
                deprived of is a deep emotional connection with Baba, which he blames on himself. He
                thinks Baba wishes Amir were more like him, and that Baba holds him responsible for
                killing his mother, who died during his birth. Amir, consequently, behaves jealously
                toward anyone receiving Baba’s affection. His relationship with Hassan only
                exacerbates this. Though Hassan is Amir’s best friend, Amir feels that Hassan, a
                Hazara servant, is beneath him. When Hassan receives Baba’s attention, Amir tries to
                assert himself by passive-aggressively attacking Hassan. He mocks Hassan’s
                ignorance, for instance, or plays tricks on him. At the same time, Amir never learns
                to assert himself against anyone else because Hassan always defends him. All of
                these factors play into his cowardice in sacrificing Hassan, his only competition
                for Baba’s love, in order to get the blue kite, which he thinks will bring him
                Baba’s approval. 

The change in Amir’s character we see in the novel centers on his growth from
                a selfish child to a selfless adult. After allowing Hassan to be raped, Amir is not
                any happier. On the contrary, his guilt is relentless, and he recognizes his
                selfishness cost him his happiness rather than increasing it. Once Amir has married
                and established a career, only two things prevent his complete happiness: his guilt
                and his inability to have a child with Soraya. Sohrab, who acts as a substitute for
                Hassan to Amir, actually becomes a solution to both problems. Amir describes Sohrab
                as looking like a sacrificial lamb during his confrontation with Assef, but it is
                actually himself that Amir courageously sacrifices. In doing this, as Hassan once
                did for him, Amir redeems himself, which is why he feels relief even as Assef beats
                him. Amir also comes to see Sohrab as a substitute for the child he and Soraya
                cannot have, and as a self-sacrificing father figure to Sohrab, Amir assumes the
                roles of Baba and Hassan.

Take the Analysis of Major Characters Quick Quiz

