In his words and actions, Baba sets the moral bar in the novel. When Amir is a
                boy, Baba’s major concern about him is that he doesn’t have the courage to stand up
                for himself, demonstrating that Baba places great value on doing what is right. If
                Amir cannot take of himself as a boy, he worries, he will not have the strength to
                behave morally as an adult. Baba follows through on these beliefs in his own
                behavior. When he and Amir flee Kabul, he is willing to sacrifice his life to keep
                the Russian guard from raping the woman with them, and in doing so he sets the
                example that Amir will follow later when he must choose between saving himself or
                doing what he knows to be right. 

What the reader sees of Baba from Amir’s narrative is not the full story,
                however. As Amir describes him, he is proud, independent, determined, but sometimes
                emotionally distant and impatient. We learn from a note Rahim Khan writes to Amir
                toward the end of the book that Baba was a man torn between two halves, specifically
                between Amir and Hassan. Amir never sees Baba’s inner conflict because Baba has very
                much separated his outward appearance from his internal emotions. For instance, Baba
                builds an orphanage, which appears to be a simple act of charity. But as Rahim Khan
                explains, Baba built the orphanage to make up for the guilt he felt for not being
                able to acknowledge Hassan as his son. Baba’s hesitation to reveal his emotions
                causes Amir to feel that he never knows Baba completely, alienating Amir from Baba
                while Amir is growing up. 

The move to America is very difficult for Baba, who is used to being wealthy
                and well-respected in his community. He goes from having wealth and a position of
                power to working a low-paying job at a gas station and living modestly. Yet his
                relationship with Amir improves. Baba, as Rahim Khan explains in his note, felt
                guilty over his rich, privileged life because Hassan was not able to share in it.
                When he no longer has his wealth, his guilt diminishes, and with Hassan not around,
                he is not straining uncomfortably to act one way with Amir and another with Hassan.
                As a result, he is able to open up more with Amir, and the two grow much closer in
                Baba’s final years. Despite the fact that he lost everything he had as a refugee, he
                dies genuinely happy, feeling proud of Amir and perhaps happy that he was able to
                build the relationship he always wanted with at least one of his sons.

Take the Analysis of Major Characters Quick Quiz

