Unlike many other creation stories, in the Greek versions
					the gods are created by the universe instead of
					the other way around. In the beginning, two entities exist, Heaven
					and Earth. Their children are the Titans, whose children, in turn,
					are the Olympians, the main Greek gods. The Titans—who include such
					notables as Ocean, Mnemosyne (Memory), and Prometheus, mankind’s
					benefactor—rule the universe until Zeus and their other children
					conquer them.

The term “Olympians” comes from Mount Olympus, the gods’ mystical
					home, which is conceived as a high mountaintop but is really a magical
					place that exists on a heavenly plane—not the heavens (which Zeus
					alone rules), earth, sea, nor underworld. Shared by all the gods,
					Olympus is perfect. Rain never falls there, and the gods while away
					their time eating, drinking, and listening to music. There are twelve
					proper Olympians: Zeus; his two brothers, Poseidon and Hades; his
					two sisters, Hestia and Hera (who is also his wife); his children,
					Ares, Athena, Apollo, Hermes, and Artemis; and two gods sometimes
					considered his offspring, Hephaestus and Aphrodite.

There are also lesser gods in Olympus, like Eros, the
					Graces, and the Muses. Several, like Hebe, goddess of Youth, are
					rarely mentioned in myths. There are also a few abstract forces
					personified, if not completely, who live on Olympus: Themis, Divine
					Justice; Dike, Human Justice; Nemesis, Righteous Anger; and Aidos,
					the sense of respect and shame that keeps humans from sinning.

Besides the Olympians, supernaturals also abound in the
					sea and underworld. Poseidon rules the sea, which is populated by
					the Nereids, sea nymphs who are distinct from the Naiads, the
					freshwater nymphs; Triton, the trumpeter of the sea; the shape-shifting
					Proteus, Poseidon’s son or attendant; Pontus, a god of the deep
					sea; and Nereus, a god of the Mediterranean. There is a different
					god for every river, and the Titan Ocean—lord of the mysterious
					river that encircles the earth—lives there along with several other
					minor water gods.

Hades and his queen, Persephone, are the only rulers
					of the underworld—a place often simply referred to as Hades, after
					its king. A mysterious locale somewhere under the earth, it is the
					realm of the dead. Many myths concern a mortal’s journey to the
					underworld and his encounters with its vicious guardian, the three-headed
					dog Cerberus. Divided into two sections, Tartarus and Erebus, Hades
					has five famous rivers: Acheron, the river of woe; Cocytus, the
					river of lamentation; Phlegethon, the river of fire; Styx, the river
					of the gods’ unbreakable oath; and Lethe, the river of forgetfulness.
					A boatman named Charon ferries the dead from Erebus across the junction
					of the Acheron and the Cocytus to the gates of Tartarus, where they
					are judged by three former kings, Rhadamanthus, Minos, and Aeacus.
					The wicked are sentenced to eternal torment, while the good are
					admitted to the Elysian Fields, a place of perfect bliss. Other
					dwellers of Hades include the Furies and the personified forces
					of Sleep and Death.

Earth has its share of lesser gods as well. Pan and Silenus
					are mischievous and jovial earth gods. Pan rules over the Satyrs,
					a race of goat-men, and dances with the Dryads, the forest nymphs,
					and the Oreads, the mountain nymphs. Also on earth are the twins
					Castor and Pollux, sometimes spoken of as gods. The twins represent
					the ideal of brotherly devotion because, when an angry cattle-herder named
					Idas killed Castor, Pollux begged to die out of love for his brother.
					Rewarding this devotion, Zeus allows them to spend half the year
					in Hades and the other half on earth. Earth is also home to the
					wind gods: Aeolus, King of the Winds; Boreas, the North Wind; Zephyr,
					the West; Notus, the South; and Eurus, the East. The earth is also
					home to many other nondivine supernatural beings, such as the Centaurs—half-men,
					half-horses, one of whom is Chiron, an important tutor to many eventual
					heroes. Two trios of sisters are also earth-bound: the fearsome
					Gorgons, of which Medusa is one, and the Graiae, three ancients
					who share one eye. Finally, the Fates, who are assigned neither
					a place in heaven nor earth, spin, measure, and cut the threads
					of men’s lives. The Fates are not subject to the decrees of any
					of the gods, not even Zeus himself.

With few meaningful changes, the Romans adopted much
					of Greek mythology, as their existing deities—the Numina, the Lares, and
					the Penates—were largely abstract, vague personifications of the
					processes of daily life. The most significant Numina were Janus and
					Saturn, who later represented the Greek Cronus, Zeus’s father.

Aside from the twelve Olympians, there are two equally
					important gods who reside on earth: Demeter and Dionysus (Bacchus).
					These two are the best friends of humanity: Demeter, goddess of
					the harvest and nature, provides fruitful plenty and protects the
					threshing-floor, while Dionysus, god of wine and revelry, rules
					the grapevine and so the production of wine. Demeter is celebrated
					in a festival every fifth September; her prime temple is at Eleusis,
					and her worship is a central and mysterious aspect of ancient life.
					Bacchus also comes to be worshipped at Eleusis—a natural pairing
					of the two gods who bring the pleasant gifts of the earth and, significantly,
					are both overpowered by seasonal change. Just as the frost kills
					the fields and the vines, these two gods—unlike the Olympians—live
					in a world filled with regular suffering.

Hades, wanting a queen, kidnaps Demeter’s only child,
					Persephone. Demeter wanders the earth in aimless despair, eventually resting
					in Eleusis in human disguise. One day, the kind family that has
					been harboring her accidentally discovers her divine nature and offends
					her. They build the great temple at Eleusis to appease her anger.
					Still, Demeter locks herself in the temple out of sadness, and at
					that time nothing grows on the earth. Finally, Zeus sends Hermes down
					to Hades to try to set everything right. Hades agrees to let Persephone
					return to her mother but slyly makes her eat a magic pomegranate
					seed that necessitates her return. Eventually a compromise is arranged:
					Persephone will stay with Hades for one-third of the year, Demeter
					for the other two-thirds. When Persephone returns to the underworld
					at the start of each winter, Demeter’s renewed sorrow makes the
					Earth barren. Persephone returns each spring, causing Demeter’s
					joy and thus the springtime’s blossoming.

Dionysus is the only main god who has one human parent:
					Zeus is his father, but his mother is a mortal named Semele. Enraged
					at Zeus’s affair, Hera cunningly fixed Semele’s death while she
					was pregnant. Zeus snatched the baby from his mother’s burning body and
					implanted it in his own side until birth, when Hermes carried the
					infant god off to be raised in secrecy by the nymphs of Nysa, a magic
					valley. Dionysus is generally a good god, spreading the secrets of
					wine production everywhere he goes. He even loves the mortal Ariadne
					after Theseus cruelly abandons her and dares defy Hades and rescue
					his mother from death. Somehow succeeding, Dionysus leads Semele
					up to live as an immortal in Olympus. He has another side, however;
					as one might expect from the lord of wine, he is a god of madness
					and insanity. The wild, bloody Maenads are his followers. When
					Pentheus, king of Thebes, defies him, Dionysus drives Pentheus’s
					mother and sisters so insane that they rip Pentheus apart with their
					bare hands. Dionysus is the final component of the Greek pantheon,
					and as time goes on, his influence grows. He eventually becomes
					the god of holy inspiration, in whose honor the most famous theater
					and poetry festival is held. Taking place every spring, it commemorates
					his rebirth—according to one story, he is torn to pieces each year
					either by the Titans or by Hera’s orders, depending on the version
					of the myth. Like Demeter’s, his story is one of tragedy and death,
					though he always rises from the dead.

Hamilton introduces the Greek gods as divine beings whose
					actions offer some preliminary explanations for the mysteries of
					the world and also shows us just how much the gods resemble humans.
					They sometimes make mistakes, fight with one another, and in some
					cases even suffer. This human aspect of the gods cements the link
					between the divine and the visible world and lends credibility to
					the explanations the myths set forth, implying that the uncertainty
					and mystery of nature that surrounds us could be explained by the
					erratic actions of the gods. So, if it was puzzling to the Greeks
					that wine could cause drunken happiness and inspiration but also
					lead to wild, dangerous madness, its duality is reconciled by the
					stories that depict the dual nature of Dionysus himself. That deeply
					perplexing condition of the seasons—fields mysteriously lie barren
					for a third of the year and then break out into beautiful, flowery
					spring—is accounted for by Demeter’s annual mourning for the loss
					of her daughter. Dionysus’s duplicity and Demeter’s depression are
					two very human qualities and allow us to explain otherworldly phenomena
					with reference to the same characteristics we see in other people
					in the visible world.

As these myths play such a vital role in explaining the
					innumerable twists and peculiarities of the world, it is no surprise
					that there is such an enormous cast of characters. The realm of
					waterways and navigation alone warrants a whole cast of characters
					in itself. Seafaring and sea trade were critically important to
					Greek civilization, so the Greeks felt a need to explain the complexities
					of bodies of water—hence the wide variety of water-oriented gods.
					The tumult of the seas and rivers can be explained by the warring
					wishes of their respective gods, just as a stormy sea could signify
					the anger of Poseidon and a calm sea the beneficence of a sea-nymph.
					Since much of what occurs in the waters is inexplicable, the Greeks
					could not ascribe it all to one all-powerful water god, therefore
					a whole host of divinities were used to explain the wide variety
					of watery mysteries. The large number of gods and beings thus indicates
					the complexity the Greeks found in the world around them, which
					is reflected in the intricate, specific explanations provided by
					their myths.

The complexity of the myths and the large cast of characters
					may also be due to the diversity of sources and traditions from
					which Hamilton compiles her material. She borrows from playwrights
					and poets whose works span two vastly different cultures and more
					than a millennium of history. Versions of the same myths differ
					across these sources, as Greek and Roman cultures had no singular
					work—like the Bible in Judeo-Christian tradition—to house a definitive version
					of their stories. Each author was thus an independent inventor,
					altering the myths to suit his own tastes and purposes. Hamilton herself
					is a similar kind of reteller, a redefiner and reinterpreter more than
					a simple collector of stories. She notes multiple versions of her stories,
					but usually prefers one over others. In any case, her retelling alerts
					us to the incredible depth of the world of Greek myth.

