Jeff and Terry are a matched pair—opposite sides of the same sexist coin.
				Where Terry represents the macho, domineering aspects of patriarchal society,
				Jeff represents the genteel, idealistic attitudes that often accompany and help
				to justify a system of sexual inequality. Gilman’s point is that Terry’s
				brutality and Jeff’s gentility are both predicated on a shared belief in the
				natural inferiority of women. In Jeff’s case, the assumption is that women are
				naturally delicate, sweet, placid creatures who need looking after. Jeff fancies
				himself as part of the tradition of the southern gentleman, which, in turn, was
				based on the tradition of knightly chivalry and courtly love. Gilman wants her
				readers to see that the object of a gentleman’s chivalry is just that: an
				object, an idol created in order to be worshipped, and not a living, feeling
				woman with independent thoughts and autonomous desires. According to Jeff’s
				beliefs, women are just as controlled and powerless as under Terry’s beliefs,
				although Jeff’s way is certainly a much nicer, more sensitive means of control.

The more Jeff learns about Herland, the more enamored of its social system
				he becomes. As Van points out, Jeff’s natural inclination to “worship” and
				idealize women leads him to embrace Herland’s ways like a religious convert and
				to reject the male-dominated outside world entirely. Jeff’s embrace of Herland,
				however, is based more on emotion than anything else, and he seems to think that
				a woman-dominated society would be preferable in every way to a male-dominated
				one, mostly because women are simply better, kinder, more moral people than are
				men. But here Jeff misses the point. Herland is better not because it is
				dominated by women but because there is no domination of anyone, by anyone, at
				all. By the end of the novel, Jeff is still struggling to see women as
				equals, not angelic superiors. Gilman seems to reward Jeff
				at the end of the novel, both by allowing him to remain in Herland and by having
				him be the father of Herland’s first naturally conceived child in 2,000
				years.

