Antonio notices three wax-covered clay dolls on Ultima’s
					shelf. One seems to be bent over in pain. Ultima forbids him to
					touch the dolls and warns him to stay away from Tenorio. She gives
					him an amulet containing dried herbs to protect him from danger.
					One evening, Narciso bursts into the Márez home to report that one
					of Tenorio’s daughters has died. Tenorio told everyone that he found
					Ultima’s little pouch of herbs under his daughter’s bed. Narciso
					warns Ultima that Tenorio is coming with a drunken lynch mob hungry
					for a witch’s death. At that moment, Tenorio and his cohorts arrive.
					With Antonio at his side, Gabriel demands that they identify themselves and
					state their business.

	To guard against witches, one man has thrust through
					his lips needles that have been blessed by a priest. Narciso declares
					that they can pin the needles over Gabriel’s door in the sign of
					a cross. If Ultima is a witch, she cannot walk through the door.
					The mob agrees to abide by the test. Ultima’s owl suddenly gouges
					out one of Tenorio’s eyes. When everyone looks up, Ultima has passed
					through the door. The mob disperses, but Tenorio vows to kill Ultima.
					Antonio notices that the needles are no longer pinned above the
					door. He never finds out if they simply fell or if someone had broken
					the cross.

Gabriel accompanies his family to El Puerto and stays
					to take part in the Lunas’ harvest for the first time. Antonio ponders
					the conflicting belief systems of the Catholic Church and the golden
					carp. He wishes there were a god that always forgave and never punished.
					He wonders if God is too much like a man. Antonio asks Pedro why
					he and Antonio’s other uncles did not come to warn Ultima like Narciso
					did. Pedro admits that he was a coward, but he vows to stand by Ultima
					from now on. Antonio’s uncle, Mateo, reports that the surviving
					Trementina sisters have woven a cottonwood coffin for their dead
					sister because a witch cannot be buried in a pine, cedar, or piñon
					coffin. He describes the frightful ceremony for a Black Mass funeral.
					Antonio has a dream in which Mateo’s description of the ceremony
					is enacted, but when he looks inside the coffin, he finds Ultima.
					He awakes just in time to see the El Puerto priest refuse to give
					the dead woman the funeral mass and, therefore, burial in hallowed
					ground. The whole town witnesses their public shame. Tenorio will
					never again be able to sway the townspeople to join his vendetta
					for revenge.


Bless Me, Ultima largely describes the
					process of leaving childhood behind as adult knowledge is acquired.
					During the remainder of the summer, the anxiety-prone Antonio learns
					that coping with change and disappointment is a normal part of living,
					and one that he must accept. At no point does life stop changing.
					Moreover, change inevitably brings loss and grief, which Antonio
					learns from watching Gabriel grieve by drinking and muttering to
					himself angrily because his sons have rebelled. But change can also
					bring redemption and forgiveness, which Anaya shows when Gabriel
					finally begins to understand that his sons must build independent
					lives and that the Márez spirit he admired in them led them to abandon
					his dream for their own. By witnessing the drama between Gabriel
					and his brothers, Antonio learns that rebellion against parental
					authority is a normal part of becoming an adult.

	When Gabriel’s old friends from the llano come to town
					for supplies, Anaya uses their stories as a vehicle for examining
					the social and economic changes affecting their lifestyles. They
					demonstrate how railroads and barbed wire are causing the vaquero
					lifestyle to change and slowly disappear. Antonio listens to the
					tales of hardship and realizes that his father pines for a life
					that is already fading. Again, change is shown to be inevitable,
					and it brings hardship and grief. However, Antonio recognizes that
					as the vaqueros drink and reminisce about the good old days, they
					discuss a past that is heavily idealized. María also idealizes her
					ancestral past—she neglects to mention that the priest who led the
					Lunas to El Puerto was actually their father. She also idealizes
					the role of the priest, an important realization for Antonio. He
					must learn to evaluate truths on his own because other peoples’
					truths are colored by their personal experiences and losses.

	Although Antonio is coming to accept the imperfections
					in his mother and father, he still has a lot to learn from his parents. Although
					Gabriel has come to terms with the loss of his old way of life,
					he retains the vaquero’s fierce spirit of independence, as we see when
					the mob comes for Ultima and he does not hesitate to defend her.
					Antonio stands by his father’s side and learns a valuable lesson in
					personal integrity. Antonio also learns that not everyone has the courage
					to stand by his or her convictions when they become unpopular. His
					Luna uncles did not warn Ultima about Tenorio’s evil plans, because
					they were afraid. Again, Antonio is learning that there are many
					moral pitfalls in adulthood. 

