Byron finds Reverend Hightower sleeping in the yard when
					he arrives to tell his friend of Joe Christmas’s capture. The minister accuses
					Byron of using the situation to his advantage and that his kindness
					and charity toward Lena mask less selfless and more carnal and insidious
					desires.

Hightower muses that, since being defrocked, he has slowly slipped
					out of conventional time and entered an existence of his own making.
					He believes that suffering is the lot of the wicked and good alike.
					He also believes that joy and pleasure are complicated gifts that
					most people do not know what to do with.

Byron leaves and returns with the Hineses, who are revealed
					to be Joe’s grandparents. Mr. Hines, still in his detached coma-like state,
					rants and raves about the weakness and sin of his daughter Milly,
					Joe’s mother. Mrs. Hines then recounts the story of Joe’s conception,
					birth, and first months. Milly became involved with a worker at
					a circus passing through the town where they lived at the time.
					Claiming he was Mexican, rather than part black, he seduced the
					young girl, and the couple attempted to run off together. But they
					were caught by Mr. Hines, who shot and killed the man and forced
					his daughter to return home.

Mr. Hines then attempted to find a doctor willing to perform
					an abortion, but his anger and religious zeal got the best of him
					during his search, and he assaulted a physician before heading to
					the next town. There, he took over the church service, trying to
					convince the congregation of the inherent evil of blacks. When the
					parishioners tried to coax him down from the pulpit, Mr. Hines pulled
					out a gun and eventually found himself in jail. By the time he was
					released and returned home, Milly was about to have the baby. When
					Milly started going into labor, Mrs. Hines sent her husband off
					to fetch the doctor. However, he refused and merely stood guard
					on the porch with his shotgun, striking his wife with the barrel
					of the gun. Milly died in labor, and Mr. Hines went off again, leaving
					his wife to care for the infant. One day, Mrs. Hines found a note
					and saw that the baby was gone.

Mr. Hines arranged a job at an orphanage in Memphis, where
					he left the infant Joe on Christmas Eve. Joe was taken in and lived
					in an atmosphere of racial taunts and slurs until the day he snuck
					into the dietician’s room to steal the toothpaste and unknowingly
					witnessed her having sex with the intern. Shortly thereafter, Mr.
					Hines, knowing that the child was adopted and taken away, returned
					home permanently, telling his wife the child was dead.

Reverend Hightower remains unclear what Byron and the
					Hineses want him to do about the situation. Mrs. Hines says she
					wishes only to see Joe freed from jail for one day, to suspend time
					temporarily as though he had not committed the crime. Byron, however, wants
					Hightower to claim falsely that Joe Christmas was with him at his
					house on the night of the murder. Outraged, the reverend refuses
					and orders the threesome out of his house.

Lena is about to have the baby, and Byron returns to Reverend Hightower’s
					to wake him and have him assist with the labor. He then dashes off
					to find a doctor, which he neglected to arrange earlier. The elderly
					practitioner is slow in getting dressed and cannot find his car
					key. By the time he and Joe arrive at the Burden cabin, the baby
					is lying in Mrs. Hines’s lap, beside Reverend Hightower, who looks
					sickly and overwhelmed. Mr. Hines is sleeping on the other cot.

Mrs. Hines, confused and somewhat delusional, mistakes
					Lena for her own daughter, Milly, and believes that the newborn
					is her infant grandson Joe. Byron realizes suddenly that he must
					tell Joe Brown all that has happened. When Hightower is ready to
					leave, he sees that the mule is gone, so he walks the two miles
					back home, where he makes breakfast and decides not to go back to
					bed. Nonetheless, he falls asleep shortly after settling into his
					reading in the yard. Waking, he walks back to the cabin, where he
					finds Lena alone with her newborn son. Lena says that Mr. Hines
					slipped out and returned to town while his wife was sleeping, but
					that Mrs. Hines awoke shortly afterward and left to find him.

Lena is glad that Mrs. Hines has left, as Mrs. Hines seemed
					to believe that the baby was actually Joe Christmas’s child, which began
					to unsettle and confuse Lena. Hightower sees that Lena had been
					anticipating the return of Byron; she tells him that Byron has arranged
					for the baby’s father to be released temporarily from jail to visit
					Lena and his new son that evening. Hightower walks to town, to the
					mill, where he learns that Byron has just quit the job he held for
					seven years. Hightower learns that Byron is most likely at the courthouse,
					where the grand jury is being convened.

As Faulkner reveals more of Joe’s past and personal history,
					he draws certain parallels between the Hineses and the McEacherns. Each
					of the patriarchs in the respective families subscribes to a faith that
					borders at times on religious fanaticism, blindly following his own
					absolute moral code and expecting all within his care to do the same.
					Both men are drawn by an instinctive almost clairvoyant force that
					draws them to the exact sites where their respective children succumb
					to the temptations of the flesh. Just as Mr. McEachern is intuitively
					directed to the school on the night of his death, so is Uncle Doc
					Hines able to track down his daughter fleeing with her lover in
					his wagon. The women also share similarities, as they live in the
					shadows of their spouses, meekly accepting their husbands’ often
					abusive and authoritarian rule.

Women form a curious, tangential presence in Light
						in August. The novel resides in a male-centered, male-dominated
					world, exploring masculine brutality and the idea of the Byronic
					hero (named for the nineteenth-century English poet Lord Byron)—a brooding,
					restless, and flawed individual wounded by life’s cruelties and
					slights. Women exist on the edges of this world, scapegoats for the
					frustrations and unrealized potential of the men in their lives, and
					often the victims of physical brutality.

In Faulkner’s imagining, his female characters fall into
					one of two broadly defined and generalized types. The first type,
					the meek and ineffective nurturer, is embodied by Mrs. McEachern
					and Mrs. Hines. Their silence, inaction, and easily cowed natures
					give free reign to the cruelty and disastrous choices of their spouses
					and indirectly result in harm to others. Lena, Hightower’s wife,
					and Milly (Joe Christmas’s mother) are representative of Faulkner’s
					second type—fallen women, seen as loose and prodigal in overtly
					embracing and asserting their sexual desires. Often, they are erroneously seen
					as the source of the undoing of the men with whom they are associated.
					It is Miss Burden, the female presence in the work that comes the
					closest to being fully realized, who resists easy categorization.
					She exists on the edges of these broad groupings—carnal and nurturing
					at the same time, seen as brazenly straddling the gender divide.

Surprisingly, Hightower, despite his isolation, emerges
					as the philosophical center of the novel—a humanist presence who
					rejects the rigid moral codes that confine Jefferson’s residents.
					Hightower’s static, abstract journey to self-knowledge and self-acceptance
					contrasts with the strivings of the other main characters, who either
					fail to attain insight or fail to act on it. Hightower, Lena, and
					Christmas all attempt to salvage their pride, turn from the harsh
					realities of the past, and infuse their lives with a newfound purpose.
					They all are damaged individuals whose reputations and senses of
					self have been compromised, both by their own actions and by social
					forces beyond their control. Hightower eventually makes peace with
					his life of internal struggle, stoically embracing his impending
					death, armed with the understanding that suffering is an unavoidable
					component of existence.

