Liz Scott tells Prejean that the Harveys feel Prejean
					used them. Robert’s execution date is set for December 28, and Prejean
					visits him every week. His attitude is unchanged. He has to wear
					a black box that severely restricts his hands because an inmate
					told the warden Robert was hoping to escape. The lawsuit against
					the Department of Corrections has won the inmates some minor concessions,
					such as more televisions and food items. Robert says he worries
					most about his mother. Prejean tells him that even real men cry.
					She asks him to consider the suffering he has inflicted and talks
					about Faith’s relationship with her mother. Robert says he is sorry.
					Prejean tells him that his last words can be words of hate or of
					love: the decision is his.

Major Kendall Cody, the man responsible for death row
					inmates and guards, asks to speak to Prejean. He says he is not
					sure how long he can keep participating in the executions, because
					after talking to the men on death row, he can tell they are just
					“little boys.” Prejean gives Robert a box of Christmas cards and
					asks him if he wants her to be there for the execution. He says
					he does. He doesn’t trust anyone on the prison payroll because they
					are participating in his death. Robert says he is prepared to die.
					In his interviews with the press, he says the government shouldn’t
					kill people, that he admires Adolf Hitler, and that Aryans are the
					master race. He says if he could change his life, he would bomb
					government buildings.

Robert is moved to the death house on Christmas Eve. Prejean returns
					to the death house the day after Christmas. She notes that the procedures
					are more lax since her last visit with Patrick. After five executions,
					the state knows that it was overly prepared. Robert says he can
					sleep well because he has told the truth.. He asks Prejean for a
					lie detector test to prove he didn’t kill Faith Hathaway. Prejean wonders
					if he is lying about the murder, and if so, why he wants the polygraph.
					Prejean asks him about his statements on Hitler and bombing buildings.
					She tells him violence is a simple solution to a complicated problem.
					He tells her about his admiration for men of action like Hitler
					and Castro, and the sense of family that came with the Aryan Brotherhood.
					He talks fondly about his time spent in Marion.

Robert admits that he regrets spouting off in his interviews.
					Prejean finds a family friend to administer the lie detector test
					that he wantsbut warns Robert that it will be difficult to obtain
					accurate results because of the stress he is under. In her meetings
					with Robert, Prejean also addresses the evolution of religion and
					violence over the centuries. She places the biblical quotation regarding
					“an eye for an eye” in its proper context, noting that it was a
					call for restraint in a chaotic time; further, the Bible also advocates
					death for a number of other minor infractions, something that would
					never be adhered to in today’s world. She presents Elaine Pagels’s
					argument that Christianity moved from nonviolence to compliance
					with more violent policies.  She contrasts this with the nonviolence
					movements of Gandhi and Martin Luther King, both of whom believed
					nonviolence was an aggressive form of social protest.

When Prejean arrives at the prison on the twenty-seventh,
					Robert’s mother, aunt, and stepbrothers are there. Robert teases
					and talks affectionately with his brothers. Warden Blackburn asks
					the family to leave three hours early, and Robert doesn’t protest.
					Prejean tells him the polygraph tests were inconclusive because
					of the stress he is under, which could either be from lying, or
					from facing imminent death. They have a conversation about Robert’s
					prejudice against African Americans. He eats his last meal and talks
					about his childhood and the jobs he has held. Prejean tells him
					what’s going to happen next. He calls his mother for the last time
					and finally cries. Guards shave Robert’s head, and Robert walks
					to the chair with his usual jaunty walk. He tells the Harveys that
					he hopes his death brings them relief and that killing is wrong.
					He is strapped into the chair and winks at Prejean. She watches
					the execution.

As Robert’s execution draws closer, he becomes an increasingly complicated
					figure. His motives for wanting a polygraph are unclear, as is his
					involvement in the murder of Faith Hathaway. Prejean points out
					her own doubts about the murder without revealing whether or not
					she thinks he is guilty. Given his long history of violence and
					his willingness to blame Joe Vaccaro for much of what happened,
					it is difficult to believe that Robert didn’t kill Faith. His desire
					to take a polygraph test just before he dies could be a last-ditch
					effort to con Prejean and prison officials, rather than a genuine attempt
					to prove that he wasn’t responsible for the stabbing.

Robert’s interviews with the press seem almost deliberately
					self-destructive, as if he knowingly tries to paint himself in the
					worst light. By asserting his support for Hitler and Fidel Castro,
					Robert is clearly trying to paint himself as an outlaw, as a man
					beyond the reach of the government who laughs at death. His desire
					to be buried in his boots is part of the same act. He wants to present
					an image of himself as untouchable. Yet as Major Kendall Cody notes,
					most of the men on death row are just little boys, and Robert’s
					displays of bravado are those of a little boy. He knows how hollow
					his words are, and as his execution draws closer, he regrets his
					statements to the press and becomes remarkably passive. He does
					not protest when the warden denies him further access to the press
					or when his family leaves early. When the polygraph test results
					come in, he hardly raises a word of protest. For a man who spent
					his life defying authority, Robert’s last few hours are surprisingly
					peaceful.

Major Kendall Cody is the first prison official who not
					only registers his objection to capital punishment but also understands
					and accepts his responsibility for perpetuating its existence. His
					appearance in the narrative is brief, but tragic. Cody is closer
					to the condemned men than any other prison official, and his belief
					that the men on death row are just little boys makes it nearly impossible
					for him to strap them into the electric chair. Cody’s thoughtfulness
					and self-conscious acceptance of his responsibility make him a sympathetic,
					sad figure.

The last moments of Robert’s life are spare and unemotional compared
					to Patrick’s. The execution is anticlimactic, and everyone from
					the guards at the gate to the official who comes prepared with an
					extra meal for Prejean knows the routine. During Patrick’s execution,
					Prejean needed the support of Millard Farmer, and following it,
					she vomited on the drive home. Prejean attends Robert’s alone, and
					as she notes in the closing line, she keeps her eyes open and watches
					the entire execution.

