When Emma returns to Yonville, Leon begins inventing pretexts
					to visit her there. He neglects both his work and his friends in
					Rouen. Emma continues to sink deeper into debt to Lheureux and convinces Charles
					to let her take a weekly piano lesson in Rouen, secretly planning
					to see Leon on a regular basis.

Every Thursday, Emma travels to Rouen, where she sneaks
					through back alleys in poor neighborhoods to see her lover. She
					feels emotionally alive during her time with Leon and is anxious
					and withdrawn at home, even though she continues to act the part
					of the dutiful wife. Her relationship with Leon grows more intense
					with each encounter, and the two begin to view one another as characters in
					a romantic novel. She develops a familiar routine of going to visit him
					and returning in the carriage to Yonville. On the road between Rouen
					and Yonville, she periodically encounters a deformed, blind beggar
					who terrifies her with his lurid, horrible song. At home, Charles
					nearly discovers the affair when he meets Emma’s alleged piano teacher
					and finds that the teacher does not know Emma’s name. But Emma shows
					him forged receipts from the lessons, and Charles is easily convinced
					that nothing untoward has occurred.

	As a means of paying her mounting debts, Lheureux convinces Emma,
					who has power of attorney over Charles’s property, to sell him some
					of Charles’s father’s estate at a loss. He also talks her into borrowing
					more and more money. When Charles’s mother arrives to look over
					the accounts, Emma has Lheureux forge a bill for a smaller amount
					of money than she has actually borrowed. Nonetheless, the elder
					Madame Bovary burns Emma’s power of attorney. Charles, however,
					soon agrees to sign a new one.

	Emma is obsessed with her time with Leon, and with experiencing
					every kind of romantic pleasure. When she stays overnight with Leon
					in Rouen without telling Charles, she makes her husband feel foolish
					for worrying about her. From that moment on, she goes to see Leon
					whenever she feels like it, and he starts to become annoyed by her
					demands on his time.

One day when Emma is scheduled to be in Rouen, Homais
					pays Leon a visit and monopolizes his time. Emma is left waiting
					in the hotel room and becomes hysterically angry, accusing Leon
					of preferring Homais’s company to hers. She returns home in a rage,
					beginning to convince herself that Leon is not the man she thought
					he was. Emma starts to act domineeringly toward Leon, who reacts with
					resentment.

	A debt collector surprises Emma with a visit, and the
					sheriff serves a legal notice against her. She borrows more money
					from Lheureux and begins a desperate campaign to raise money to
					pay her debts, even pawning many objects from Charles’s house in
					Yonville. All the while, she continues to spend decadently during
					her time with Leon, forcing him to entertain her opulently and providing
					him the money to do so. He becomes sick of her petulant extravagance,
					and she becomes disgusted with his reticence. Each of them is bored
					with their affair. She begins cavorting with unsavory company, even
					accompanying some vulgar clerks to a disreputable restaurant after
					a masquerade ball.

	When Emma returns to Yonville after the masquerade, a
					court order awaits her, demanding that she pay 8,000 francs
					or lose all her property. She again goes to Lheureux for help, but
					he refuses to loan her any more money, sending her away. Lheureux
					hopes to foreclose on Charles’s estate and everything the Bovarys
					own.

The essential superficiality of Emma’s connection with
					Leon compounds the disaster of her financial indiscretions. Once
					her affair with Leon loses its early glow, Emma loses all sense
					of proportion and propriety, oscillating between extremes of self-indulgence,
					self-pity, depression, and guilt. Emma and Leon try to make one
					another into romantic ideals but fail to connect with each other
					as real individuals. As these ideals crumble around their actual
					personalities, they become increasingly disgusted with one another.
					Emma reacts by seeking pleasure at all costs and in more egregious
					ways. Her initial desire to be a cosmopolitan aristocrat gives way
					to a carnal, voracious desire for pleasure, evident in her escapades
					with vulgar men at unsavory parties. Poor Charles continues to facilitate
					his wife’s infidelity, funding the trips she takes to Rouen on the
					pretext of taking piano lessons. The blind beggar Emma sometimes
					encounters between Yonville and Rouen is one of the most terrifying
					figures in the novel. He is a symbol of Emma’s moral wretchedness,
					and his morbid presence also signals her approaching death.

	Emma’s financial ruin parallels her moral ruin. Once
					she obtains the power of attorney over Charles’s finances, her destructive
					qualities spiral further out of control. Emma’s attempt to transcend
					the values of her middle-class existence fails as much out of her
					own free will as the circumstances in which she lives. Even Flaubert,
					who initially describes Emma as a victim of circumstance, has begun
					to judge her unfavorably. Emma’s moral corruption, however, remains dependent
					on the will of the men around her. At the end of Part Three, Chapter
					V, Leon wonders, “where could she have learnt this corruption so
					deep and well masked as to be almost unseizable?” The answer is
					Rodolphe. A man is responsible for even Emma’s deepest corruption.

	Leon’s question at the end of Part Three, Chapter V is
					a classic example of free indirect discourse, a technique that Flaubert
					perfected. By this point in the novel, the narrative centers around Emma,
					but Flaubert at times shows his heroine through the eyes of others.
					He does not offset Leon’s and Charles’s thoughts with quotation
					marks, instead he writes directly the words that pass through their
					minds. At one point, Charles thinks, “What was the meaning of all
					these fits of temper?” Flaubert knows the answer, of course, but
					by using free indirect discourse, he lets us see for a moment how bewildered
					Charles is by Emma’s behavior.

	Another of Flaubert’s techniques is the contrast between
					lofty, profound sentiments and mundane, ordinary things. Speaking
					of Leon’s love for Emma, he writes, “he admired the exaltation of
					her soul and the lace on her petticoat.” This contrast between spirituality
					and materiality discredits the depth of Leon’s love. He seems to love
					blindly, caring as much for Emma’s petticoats as for her soul. Flaubert
					employs a similar technique when he describes Emma and Leon’s weekly
					trysts in a hotel room. In a virtually identical tone, he describes
					both the lovers’ vows they exchange and the decorations on the mantelpiece.
					This juxtaposition renders the great otherworldly romance Emma conceives
					a small and sordid affair.

