Hrothgar, inspired by the Shaper’s song of a glorious
					meadhall emanating a light that would “shine to the ends of the
					ragged world,” decides to build a magnificent meadhall high on a
					hill to stand as an eternal testament to the mighty justice of his
					Danes. Hrothgar plans to achieve glory by dispensing treasure from
					his new meadhall, and he hopes for his descendants to do the same.
					He sends to far-off kingdoms for artisans and builders to create
					the marvelous building. When it is finished, Hrothgar names the
					hall Hart and invites all the races of men to witness it. Grendel
					scoffs at the pomposity of it all, but he still manages to get caught
					up in the joyful celebration and the endlessly optimistic display
					of Hrothgar’s supposed goodness. Overcome with grief and shame at
					his own nasty, bloodthirsty ways, Grendel slinks away from Hart.

Grendel wanders through the forest, puzzling aloud over
					the Shaper’s mysterious power. The forest whispers back at him,
					but he feels as if a darker, more sinister force were speaking to
					him as well. The chilly, invisible presence grows in intensity and
					continues to unnerve Grendel. He grabs at a fat, slick vine, thinking
					it is a snake, only to discover it is harmless after all. The presence
					follows Grendel to the edge of town before mysteriously disappearing.

At the outskirts of town, Grendel observes young couples
					courting. While circling the clearing, he steps on a man whose throat
					has been cut and whose clothes have been stolen. Grendel is baffled
					by the contrast between the innocent picture of the pairs of lovers
					and the violently murdered corpse. Just as Grendel lifts the corpse
					over his shoulder, the Shaper begins to play his harp. The Shaper
					sings of the creation of the world by the greatest of gods, and
					of an ancient feud between two brothers that split the world between
					darkness and light. The Shaper claims that Grendel is on the side
					cursed by God. The Shaper’s words are so powerful that Grendel almost believes
					them, although he takes the corpse—a man murdered by his fellow
					men—as proof that the notion of a clear divide between man and monster
					is flawed. Nonetheless, overcome by the power of the Shaper’s song,
					Grendel staggers toward the hall with the body in his hands, crying
					for mercy and declaring himself a friend. The men do not understand
					Grendel’s cries, and they chase him out of the town with battle-axes
					and poison-tipped spears.

Grendel throws himself down on the forest floor, causing
					a twelve-foot crack to appear in the ground. He swears at Hrothgar’s Danes
					with curses he has picked up from human conversations he has overheard.
					When Grendel regains his calm, he looks up through the treetops,
					half expecting to see the god whom the Shaper described. Grendel
					asks the sky why he cannot have someone to talk to, as Hrothgar
					and the Shaper do. Grendel comforts himself with the knowledge that
					the Danes are doomed: he knows enough about human nature to realize
					that Hrothgar’s descendants are very unlikely to follow Hrothgar’s
					glorious ideas of philanthropy.

Two nights later, however, Grendel returns to hear more
					of the Shaper’s song. Though he is increasingly addicted, he nonetheless
					is enraged by the Shaper’s hopeful words, convinced of the mechanical brutishness
					of reality. Though Grendel dismisses the Shaper’s proposed religious
					system as a crackpot theory, he admits that he desperately wants
					to believe in it himself. Once again, Grendel hears sinister whisperings
					in the darkness, and he can feel the mysterious force pulling at
					him. He grabs a vine to reassure himself, only to discover this
					time that the vine really is a snake.

Back in the cave, Grendel’s mother whimpers at him, straining for
					language, but the only sound she manages to produce is the gibberish
					sound “Dool-dool! Dool-dool!” Grendel
					sleeps, only to wake up to the darkness pulling at him even more
					inexorably than before. He leaves the cave and walks to the cliff
					side. Grendel makes his mind a blank and sinks like a stone, down
					through the earth and sea.

The humans’ second significant encounter with Grendel
					links them with him in a new way, scripting a role for the outsider
					within the humans’ burgeoning religious system. The first time the
					humans see Grendel, they have no idea what to make of him. They
					run through a list of absurd options before finally deciding that
					Grendel is some kind of tree spirit. The subsequent battle is marked
					by a similar state of ridiculous confusion and chaos. However, Grendel
					senses that these humans are more dangerous creatures than their
					silly helmets and tiny bodies suggest. They are patternmakers, and
					therefore far more difficult to defeat than any of the dumb, instinctual
					animals that Grendel has confronted thus far. Now the Shaper—the
					most powerful patternmaker of all—has woven a story that not only
					gives the humans a religious framework within which to live, but
					also includes a preassigned role for Grendel, who up to this point
					has been merely an observer.

The Shaper’s song about the creation of the world expresses
					a Judeo-Christian view of the universe, which is appropriate given that
					the Beowulf poet was writing from a similar standpoint.
					The Shaper’s tale—the story of an ancient feud between brothers
					that results in a world divided between darkness and light—is an
					allusion to the biblical story of Cain and Abel. The story, found
					in the book of Genesis, concerns the two sons of Adam and Eve, each
					of whom brings God a sacrificial offering. When God prefers Abel’s gift
					of lamb meat to Cain’s gift of crops, Cain murders Abel in a jealous
					rage. When God angrily questions Cain as to the whereabouts of his
					brother, Cain replies, “Am I my brother’s keeper?” God curses Cain
					to wander the earth as a fugitive, but also puts a mark on Cain so
					that anyone who tries to kill him will be visited with vengeance sevenfold.
					The idea that Grendel is a descendant of Cain can be traced back
					to the original Beowulf text, which makes the same claim.
					Furthermore, Gardner’s characterization of Grendel’s mother early
					in the novel foreshadows this notion, as Grendel imagines his mother
					to be haunted by some “unremembered, perhaps ancestral crime.”

The role the Shaper assigns to Grendel both pleases and
					upsets him. On one hand, Grendel takes most of the Shaper’s songs
					with a grain of salt, as he is aware of the songs’ fictional quality.
					Grendel knows that man cannot be as holy as the Shaper suggests,
					because he himself has seen evidence of humankind’s brutality on
					numerous occasions—if Grendel is cursed, so is man. It takes effort
					for Grendel to remember these considerations, and finally he breaks
					down, weeps, and experiences a “conversion”—a word that suggests
					that Grendel accepts the Shaper’s religious vision. To Grendel,
					the story of God may be a lie, but it is a beautiful one. In this
					Judeo-Christian system, the outsider Grendel finds a place and a
					purpose, even though that position is a savage, unsavory one. Grendel
					is not allowed to join the humans as a brother or a friend, but
					he can join them, paradoxically, by fighting them.

In this chapter, Grendel becomes more aware of his own
					use of language, the ways in which it both connects him to humans
					and separates him from them. Grendel grudgingly depends on man’s language
					as he narrates his story. We see that exposure to the Shaper’s song
					affects Grendel’s own narrative style. Furthermore, throughout the
					novel, Grendel utilizes traditional elements of Anglo-Saxon poetry,
					such as alliterative verse and kenning (short, metaphorical descriptions
					of a person or object: for example, “whale-road” for “sea”). When
					Grendel tearfully flees Hart after the Danes reject him, he sputters
					a series of curse words and then laments the fact that even these
					curses must be borrowed from human language. The great tragic irony,
					of course, is that Grendel and the humans speak the same language,
					though the humans are too scared and repulsed to try to understand
					Grendel when he attempts to communicate with them. Grendel can do
					many things with language, as his increasing experiments with form
					and style show; however, he cannot use language for its most basic
					human purpose—to communicate.

