The proverbs, of which his talk was full,
						were . . . those folk sayings which taken without a context seem
						so insignificant, but when used appositely suddenly acquire a significance
						of profound wisdom.

St. Petersburg high society continues its glittering life,
					almost unaware of the nation’s sufferings. Helene has fallen ill
					and is being treated by an Italian doctor, though everyone knows
					her trouble results from her marital dilemma. At one of Anna Pavlovna’s
					parties, Vasili Kuragin reads a solemn greeting to the tsar from
					a bishop, praying for military victory. Anna predicts that good
					news will arrive the next day, the tsar’s birthday.

Indeed, the next day, a great deal of news breaks: the
					victory at Borodino, the deaths of several generals, and the sudden
					death of Helene, the result of a drug overdose. The tsar receives
					a letter from Rastopchin, recounting Kutuzov’s decision to leave
					Moscow. The tsar writes to Kutuzov, expressing his great regret
					at this decision. Kutuzov responds with a messenger, Colonel Michaud,
					to tell the tsar of the burning of Moscow. The tsar tearfully vows
					to do everything possible to save his country and defeat Napoleon.

The narrator reminds us that even in such dire times,
					patriotism and heroism were still less important in people’s lives
					than their own trivial, everyday, private interests. Nicholas, getting
					by like everyone else, travels to Voronezh to buy remounts for his
					regiments. After conducting his business, Nicholas attends a local
					governor’s ball and flirts with another man’s attractive wife. Then,
					Mary’s aunt Malvintseva, who is also present, invites Nicholas to
					visit her and Mary. The governor’s wife offers to arrange a marriage
					between Nicholas and Mary. Nicholas admits he is attracted to Mary,
					but says that he loves and is engaged to Sonya. The governor’s wife counters
					that marrying Sonya would not be beneficial in the long run. The
					governor’s wife’s plan disturbs Mary, who is still overcome with
					grief about her father. Though Mary is worried about how to speak
					to Nicholas, she is nonetheless charming to him when he visits,
					and seems illuminated by love. Nicholas is attracted to Mary, but
					is confused by his promises to Sonya and by his inability to imagine
					being married to Mary. He is impressed by her moral seriousness,
					but also a bit scared of her.

Nicholas receives a letter from Sonya graciously ending
					her engagement with him and informing him that Natasha is nursing the
					wounded Andrew. Sonya has written the letter under pressure from
					Countess Rostova, who has demanded that Sonya repay her debts to
					the family by giving up Nicholas so he can marry Mary. Secretly,
					however, Sonya feels that Nicholas is destined to be hers. She reminds
					Natasha of her supposed vision of Andrew lying down, saying that
					the prophecy has come true, and implying that Natasha and Andrew
					are destined to be together.

Meanwhile, the French treat Pierre with hostile respect
					while they hold him captive on suspicions of espionage. Pierre feels
					sad when his captors make fun of him. The authorities try his case
					with a guilty verdict as a foregone conclusion. Pierre refuses to
					state his name, which annoys the French. They lead Pierre through
					the burning streets of Moscow to the office of the marshal, Davout.
					Pierre establishes a human connection with Davout, but is nonetheless
					led out to his execution. Pierre reflects that some kind of system
					beyond his understanding has condemned him to death. Pierre and
					five other prisoners are led into a field. The other prisoners are
					shot and buried by riflemen, some of whom are sickened by their
					crimes. Pierre is unexpectedly pardoned and taken as a prisoner
					to a dirty shed. Stupefied by the experience, Pierre does not understand
					what has happened. One of the other prisoners, Platon Karataev, impresses
					Pierre with his sincerity, simplicity, good sense, faith, and kindness
					to his dog. The middle-aged Platon never complains, and he treats
					everyone with unfailing good cheer.

Princess Mary, receiving news that the Rostovs are at
					Yaroslavl, sets off immediately to see her brother Andrew, who is
					with them. She arrives at the home where the Rostovs are staying,
					and the Countess greets her warmly. Natasha tearfully speaks to
					Mary about Andrew’s condition. Natasha takes Mary into the room where
					Andrew is lying, and Mary is shocked to see her brother looking
					soft and gentle. Mary knows this appearance to be a sign of his approaching
					death. Andrew quietly tells Mary that fate has brought him together
					with Natasha after all. Andrew also speaks to Mary about Nicholas,
					giving his approval of their marriage. Mary prays to God for Andrew’s
					soul. Andrew, aware he is dying, contemplates life and death. He
					confesses his love to Natasha, who cares for him tirelessly. Wavering
					between consciousness and oblivion, Andrew thinks of love as a unifying
					force, but he is aware that his ideas are cerebral and lack something.
					Under Natasha’s and Mary’s loving watch, Andrew dies.

Kutuzov leads the Russian troops back toward Moscow, restraining them
					from attacking the vestiges of the French army. Napoleon writes
					an arrogant letter to Kutuzov from Moscow, which Kutuzov interprets
					as asking for settlements. The Russian army is rested and stronger
					than before, and is superior to the French forces in Moscow.

Kutuzov, with his characteristic genius of profiting from
					randomness, is aware that he cannot restrain his troops, so he orders
					an advance. Furious to discover that his orders are not received,
					he is forced to wait an extra day. During the battle, the Russian
					regiments are divided and confused as usual, and many men are killed
					pointlessly. One regiment fights well, however. Kutuzov, who is
					able to restrain his column from attacking, is decorated for the
					battle.

Napoleon inexplicably withdraws from Moscow, avoiding
					further battle engagements. Napoleon issues proclamations to the Muscovites
					assuring them that churches, theaters, and marketplaces are operating
					again, and that tranquility is returning to city life. None of these
					proclamations have any real effect, and the French loot the city
					as they depart. 

Pierre spends a month ragged and barefoot in prison, respected by
					his captors and on friendly terms with a nameless dog. His fellow inmate
					Platon Karataev sews a shirt for a French officer and is forced
					to hand over the leftover scraps of cloth. The officer then feels guilty
					and gives the scraps back to Platon, who wants to use them as leg
					bandages. Surprisingly, in prison Pierre feels happy for the first time
					in his life, appreciating simple pleasures like food and sleep.
					He remembers Andrew’s bitter comment that happiness is merely the absence
					of suffering. Pierre now agrees with Andrew’s words—without the
					bitterness.

The French release the Russian prisoners and force them
					to march with the French troops in the evacuation of Moscow. During the
					march, Pierre and the soldiers are happy despite cruelty and privations
					on the part of the French. Pierre is aware of a mysterious force
					that protects him from physical suffering. He knows that the French
					cannot touch his immortal soul, regardless of what they do to his
					body.

The Russian officers Dokhturov and Konovnitsyn receive
					word that Napoleon is in Forminsk, and they pass this information
					on to Kutuzov. Kutuzov, still wondering whether Borodino has dealt
					a mortal wound to the French, receives the news gratefully, understanding
					that Napoleon has left Moscow and that Russia is saved. As the French
					forces retreat back to Smolensk on their way to France, Kutuzov
					is unable to prevent Russian troops from attacking them.

The spiritual connection developing between Nicholas and
					Princess Mary in these chapters mirrors the deeply moving bond between Natasha
					and Andrew when they are reunited. In both cases Tolstoy emphasizes
					a profound spiritual union between a man and a woman that may have
					an erotic element, but that goes far beyond mere romantic love.
					Nicholas is unquestionably attracted to Mary, but his attraction
					is different from all his earlier dalliances with women, including
					his love for Sonya. With Mary, he feels more than simple pleasure
					or happiness, as he is struck by her moral earnestness and spiritual
					devotion. Similarly, Natasha’s connection with Andrew, though once
					merely a romantic crush, now consists of a deeper caring and devotion,
					as she looks after her dying former fiancé. For both Rostov siblings,
					involvement with the spiritually serious Bolkonski family proves
					to be an emotional education. Both Nicholas and Natasha move beyond
					their earlier pursuits of romantic happiness and enter a more spiritually
					committed state.

Pierre’s identity crisis as he wanders through occupied
					Moscow is a major turning point in the development of his character,
					and an important symbolic event in the novel overall. Pierre’s identity
					has always been a bit uncertain, even from the beginning when he
					is introduced as a bastard child without any ensured inheritance.
					Educated abroad, Pierre feels like an outsider: he has awkward ways,
					his sincerity distinguishes him from the polished fakes of the Russian upper
					classes, and even his body looks different. This sense of being an
					outcast reaches its culmination when Pierre, watching Moscow burn,
					asks who he is. This uncertain identity, however, is also a source
					of power for Pierre. His refusal to tell his French captors his name
					comes across as an act of heroism rather than of cowardice, and
					his nameless status earns him notoriety in the prison camp. Being
					nameless forces him to focus inwardly on questions of inner happiness,
					and indeed Pierre finds himself happier in prison than ever before—just
					as the prison dog, called by several different names, is happy being
					unidentified. Identity is social and external, while happiness is
					internal only.

Pierre, one of the novel’s more innocent characters, simply
					cannot understand the cruelty he witnesses. Taken as prisoner before the
					French marshal, he feels a momentary awareness of common human brotherhood
					with the man, and is reassured that this feeling will prove stronger
					than the dictates of war. But Pierre is wrong, as the Frenchman
					quickly regains his belief that the French and Russians are enemies,
					ordering Pierre to be executed. The execution of the five prisoners,
					which Pierre witnesses in a state of trauma, is utterly unexplainable
					and unjustifiable to his simple heart. The killing is objectionable
					even to the French executioners, who appear ashamed of their actions,
					especially the one of them who swoons when it is over.

Platon Karataev is one of the most celebrated characters
					in War and Peace. His qualities have been trumpeted
					not only by earlier Soviet critics who saw in him the best of the
					Russian peasant virtues, but also by foreigners who have seen him
					as a figure of unparalleled vitality. Platon’s fame is surprising,
					as he appears in only a dozen pages of this vast novel. But he appears
					at a critical moment, during Pierre’s lapse into misery, confusion,
					and existential anguish in prison. Platon shows up as a beacon of
					hope simply because he needs so little to be happy, demonstrating
					to Pierre that happiness is separate from all external factors,
					including health and freedom. Platon bustles busily around the prison,
					talking to the dog, sewing a shirt for a French officer, and quoting
					Russian proverbs at key moments. His first name is the Russian name
					for Plato, the Greek philosopher who counseled us to look beyond
					the material world to a realm of greater peace and certainty. Platon,
					though an illiterate man who has probably never heard of Plato,
					illustrates the philosopher’s life-affirming teachings.

