As Levin and Kitty’s wedding date is set, Levin remains
					in his blissful daze. He performs all the duties expected of him
					but is almost mad with joy. Stiva reminds Levin that he must go
					to confession before his wedding. Levin meets with the priest and
					confesses that he doubts everything, including the existence of
					God. The priest sternly warns Levin that the Christianity of his
					future offspring is at stake. Later, Levin enjoys a bachelor party
					with his brother Sergei and Sergei’s university friend, Katavasov.
					The bachelors ask Levin if he is prepared to give up his freedom
					for the constraints of marriage. Levin, feeling insecure and wondering
					why Kitty should ever love him at all, asks Kitty whether she wants
					to go through with the wedding. They have a brief argument but are
					reconciled.

That evening, the wedding guests await the groom in the
					church. Levin is late because a mix-up involving his clothes has
					left him without a proper shirt to wear. The ceremony is delayed
					and the guests become impatient, but Levin finally arrives at the
					church. Kitty cannot understand the priest’s words as she hears
					them, for she is swept away by love. Levin cries during the ceremony.
					The wedding concludes majestically, and Levin and Kitty leave for
					his country estate.

Vronsky and Anna, meanwhile, travel in Italy for three
					months together and settle down and rent a palazzo. Vronsky, seeking
					distraction, is delighted to meet an old school friend, Golenishchev. Golenishchev
					and Anna get along well. Vronsky listens as Golenishchev expounds
					on the book he is writing, and Anna tells Golenishchev that Vronsky
					has taken up painting.

Anna, for her part, has been very happy. Far from Russia,
					she feels no more disgrace. Vronsky is less contented, however:
					all his desires are satisfied, so he misses desire itself. He begins
					to paint a portrait of Anna. Hearing of a Russian painter named
					Mikhailov who lives in their town, Vronsky reflects on the new generation
					of Russian intellectuals who have talent but lack education. Anna, intrigued,
					proposes visiting Mikhailov.

When Vronsky and Anna arrive at Mikhailov’s studio, the
					artist is flattered to receive attention from wealthy Russians.
					He shows them a painting in progress, a scene from the life of Jesus
					Christ. Anna and Vronsky praise Mikhailov’s rendering of Pontius
					Pilate, and Anna delights in the expression of pity on Jesus’ face.
					The visitors enjoy even more a landscape painting of Russian boys
					relaxing by a river. Vronsky asks whether the latter painting is
					for sale and hires Mikhailov to paint Anna’s portrait. Vronsky abandons
					his own portrait of Anna and becomes dissatisfied with their Italian
					life.

Levin slowly adjusts to married life. He imagines that
					Kitty needs only to be loved, forgetting that she has desires and
					aspirations of her own. Kitty throws herself into housekeeping with
					gusto in a way that initially annoys Levin but then pleases him.
					Quarrels occasionally erupt. One day, Levin gets lost on the way
					home from the fields, and Kitty is jealous and suspicious of where
					he has been. He is offended but then forgives her.

Meanwhile, Levin continues work on his book about the
					Russian agricultural system, but his slow progress distresses him.
					He chastises himself for being spoiled by married life, and silently reproaches
					Kitty for her lack of interest in anything other than housekeeping.
					Levin receives a letter from Marya Nikolaevna, saying that she is
					back with his brother Nikolai, who is dying of consumption. Levin
					says he must visit Nikolai, and Kitty insists on going with him.
					Levin does not want her to come, resenting his lack of freedom and
					shuddering at the idea of Kitty meeting a former prostitute. Levin
					and Kitty fight, but finally he allows her to come along.

Levin’s confession to the priest brings religion out from
					the background—where it has been consistently throughout Anna -Karenina—and
					into focus in the foreground. Like many thinkers of his era, Tolstoy
					was skeptical of religious faith but also yearned for its potential
					for transcendence. In the novel, Tolstoy gives Levin—his namesake
					in the novel, as Lev is Tolstoy’s first name—this same ambivalence
					toward religion. Levin is a deeply soulful person, as we see in
					his ecstasy in both farming and marriage. However, though he has
					the spirituality that faith demands, he lacks belief in its dogma and
					rituals. With characteristic candor, Levin tells the priest that
					he doubts the existence of God—a remarkable statement even for Levin.
					This contradiction, however, is exactly Tolstoy’s point: Levin is
					in the church not because of faith but because of social convention,
					as a confession certificate is required for marriage. Tolstoy invites
					us to see religion as divided between spirituality on one hand and
					social expectations on the other. He does not attack religion but merely
					suggests that observance of its social institutions often replaces
					true spirituality.

Meanwhile, the account of Vronsky and Anna’s time in Italy hints
					at the lovers’ future difficulties as refugees from Russian social conventions.
					At first glance, they seem to live in an expatriate paradise: they
					are wealthy, have servants and a beautiful palazzo, and pass their
					time strolling and painting, with no enemies to attack or demean
					their love. Anna is happier than she ever imagined, and Vronsky
					feels that all his desires are satisfied. Nonetheless, there is trouble
					in this seeming paradise. Vronsky misses desire—in particular, we
					feel he misses the professional ambitions that guided his life in
					Russia. Even in exile, Russia draws the lovers back into its grip. Significantly,
					the people important to Anna and Vronsky in Italy are Russians—Golenishchev
					and Mikhailov. No Italians are significant enough to be named in
					the novel. The painting that Vronsky loves most is not the portrait
					of Jesus—a rebel like him and Anna—but rather a Russian landscape.
					For all his love of Italy, Vronsky is pulled back toward the very
					country where he and his lover are damned, defiled, and excluded.
					Social conventions, we see, are not easy to escape. They are part
					of us, and we continue to live within them even when suffering because
					of them.

As Tolstoy continues to develop the plots involving Levin
					and Anna in parallel, he invites us to compare the differing honeymoons of
					the novel’s two recently formalized romantic relationships. Despite
					the fact that Levin’s majestic church wedding contrasts starkly
					with Anna’s scandalous flight to Italy, the two unions are surprisingly
					similar. The difference between their respective legal statuses
					hardly matters when we focus on their internal dynamics. Both couples
					settle in the countryside, leaving behind social ambitions, and
					both struggle with the disorientation that comes from having their
					desires satisfied. Vronsky finds total satisfaction to be irksome,
					and Levin admits to Kitty that he is discontented even though he
					is happy. Both men are unable to do the work they dream of doing:
					Vronsky is antsy after resigning from his regiment, and Levin cannot
					bring himself to work on his book on agriculture. The similarities
					between Vronky and Levin remind us not to exaggerate the importance
					of Anna’s so-called immorality. Relationships are relationships
					whether or not they bear social or religious stamps of approval.
					Tolstoy encourages us to look beyond social rules and to examine
					the inner workings of romantic unions with an open mind.

