Rucker Blakeslee, a grandfather, patriarch, and successful
				storeowner, is the commanding center of Cold Sassy Tree. His
				imposing physical stature reflects his authority over his family
				and the ease with which he flouts Cold Sassy’s conventions. Not
				only Rucker’s morals but also his wit and prankish tendency stimulate
				his desire to be a thorn in Cold Sassy’s side. He takes particular
				joy in shaming the town’s hypocrites. He marries a much younger
				woman, holds church services in his own home, and puts on a lavish
				burial for Camp, even though Camp kills himself. Rucker is determined
				to defy every convention that the rest of the town observes. Cold
				Sassy grumbles at Rucker’s cantankerousness, but Rucker is a figure
				of integrity for his grandson, Will, and for us. The town
				is prejudiced, but Rucker is open-minded. The town clings to outdated
				rules, but Rucker behaves according to the dictates of his conscience.
				The town pays lip service to Christianity, but Rucker deciphers
				Jesus’ words. 

	Despite—and also because of—Rucker’s stubbornness
				and individuality, he holds a position of authority in Cold Sassy.
				He owns the general store, which is the hub of the town’s business and
				gossip. He rules, sometimes fiercely, over his obedient daughters
				and their husbands and children. Because Rucker is an established
				part of Cold Sassy life, his brashness is easier than it looks.
				He can safely rail against the status quo, knowing that his power,
				his will, and his money protect him from the anger his behavior
				inspires. His rebellion commands admiration, but it also sometimes
				makes scapegoats of Will, Miss Love, and Loomis, who do not have
				the same power that protects Rucker and makes him invulnerable to
				criticism.

	Rucker becomes more cheerful and easygoing
				as the novel progresses. During his marriage to Mattie Lou, various
				difficulties affect his temperament. Although Rucker and Mattie
				Lou are kind and considerate to each other, the traumas of their
				marriage make Rucker controlling and stingy. He provides well for
				his family, but he vents his sadness through miserliness. Under
				the influence of Miss Love Simpson, however, Rucker begins to exhibit
				a new generosity and gentleness.

