Upon his release from the sanitarium, Humbert heads for
					a small town to stay with a Mr. McCoo. A relative of a friend of
					his uncle’s, McCoo has a twelve-year-old daughter, whom Humbert
					fantasizes about. When he arrives in the town of Ramsdale, however,
					he learns that the McCoos’ house has burned down. Mr. McCoo recommends
					a boarding house at 342 Lawn Street, run by the widowed Mrs. Haze.
					Neither Mrs. Haze nor the house impress Humbert. He describes her
					as a fatally conventional woman, one who, despite her so-called
					cultural and community activities, has many pretensions and little
					imagination. He realizes with distaste that she will probably try
					to seduce him. He finds the house horribly unappealing until he
					sees Mrs. Haze’s twelve-year-old daughter, Dolores, sitting on the lawn.
					Humbert finds her resemblance to Annabel uncanny and immediately
					remembers his time with Annabel twenty-five years ago. He decides
					to stay.

From prison, Humbert recalls passages from his diary regarding
					the time he lived at the Haze house in 1947 and his initial thoughts
					of Lolita. Almost all his entries describe encounters with Lolita
					and contain romantic descriptions of her nymphet qualities, as well
					as his various attempts to lure her into his presence. Delighted,
					he learns that he resembles a celebrity Lolita adores, which causes Charlotte
					to tease Lolita about having a crush on Humbert. Though he knows
					that he should not be keeping a journal of his attraction, Humbert
					can’t help himself. He often goes into Lolita’s room and touches
					her things. He describes Charlotte Haze disdainfully and hates her
					for always complaining about Lolita. He knows that he must behave
					himself with Charlotte around, so he daydreams about killing her. 

Charlotte, Lolita, and Humbert plan to go to Hourglass
					Lake for a picnic, but the trip continually gets postponed. Humbert
					gets a further disappointment when he learns that a classmate of
					Lolita’s will accompany them. Humbert learns that the previous boarder,
					elderly Mrs. Phalen, broke her hip and had to leave suddenly, which enabled
					Humbert to come and live with the Hazes. Humbert expresses amazement
					at how fate led him here, to his dream nymphet.

One Sunday, when the trip to the lake gets postponed yet
					again, Lolita becomes angry and refuses to go to church with Charlotte. Delighted,
					Humbert has Lolita all to himself. When Lolita starts eating an
					apple, Humbert teasingly takes it away from her. He finally returns
					it and, as Lolita sings a popular song, discreetly rubs against her
					until he climaxes. Lolita runs off, apparently without having noticed
					anything. 

Famished, Humbert goes into town for lunch. He feels proud
					that he managed to satisfy himself without corrupting the child,
					and he wavers between wanting to repeat the experience and wanting
					to preserve Lolita’s purity. Later, Charlotte tells Humbert that
					she is sending Lolita away to summer camp for three weeks. Humbert hides
					his misery by pretending to have a toothache. Mrs. Haze recommends
					that he see their neighbor, Dr. Quilty, a dentist and the uncle
					of a playwright. 

Humbert considers leaving the boarding house until Lolita
					returns in the fall. Lolita doesn’t want to go to camp, but Charlotte
					dismisses her tears. Humbert muses that Lolita might lose her purity while
					she’s away and cease to be a nymphet. Just before she enters the
					car to go to camp, Lolita rushes back and kisses Humbert.

The contrast between Humbert and Mrs. Haze exemplifies
					the contrast between the old, sophisticated, decadent world Europe
					and the artificial, pretentious world of the United States. Charlotte
					Haze aspires to be the kind of woman Humbert could love, a worldly,
					elegant, refined woman who appreciates finer things. Yet her house, with
					its modern furniture, cheap art, and general untidiness, manifests
					a different personality. Throughout the novel, Humbert’s European
					manner and old-world aesthetics attract a number of American women,
					each of whom he eventually rejects. This sexual clash between America
					and Europe will be upended in the relationship between Humbert and
					Lolita, when Humbert falls under the spell of Lolita’s fresh, vulgar
					American sensibilities. Despite Humbert’s best efforts, any attempt
					to educate and sophisticate Lolita will fail. Humbert generally
					forgives and occasionally romanticizes Lolita’s vulgarity, unlike
					Charlotte, who has little patience for her daughter’s shallowness. 

Humbert describes Lolita as an object, focusing on the
					nymphet qualities he finds so exciting while rarely addressing her
					inner mind or feelings. Though he notes her bad moods and her vulgarities, Humbert
					nonetheless remains convinced of Lolita’s essential connection to
					Annabel. This connection is significant to Humbert and Humbert alone,
					which reinforces his notion that only a special man like himself
					could truly comprehend the rareness of a nymphet like Lolita. At
					the same time, this reasoning reduces Lolita to a privately held
					notion of Humbert’s and denies her the chance to grow or create
					meaning in her life. The disconnect between Humbert’s romantic but
					objectifying view of Lolita the nymphet and the real character of
					Lolita the girl finds a correspondence in Humbert’s language, which
					also romanticizes the unromanticizable. Humbert describes his perverse,
					unlawful desires with elegant, beautiful prose, rendering attractive
					what many readers would otherwise find repulsive. This effect of
					language is particularly notable when Humbert masturbates against
					Lolita. Despite the troubling nature of the encounter, the rapturous,
					satisfying language complicates the reader’s reaction, as we may
					simultaneously be disturbed by the events yet seduced by the prose.

Even at this early stage, the love triangle between Lolita,
					Charlotte, and Humbert appears volatile, particularly as the characters seem
					unaware of the darker elements of their emotional responses. Besides
					the obvious, unsettling nature of Humbert’s infatuation, a strong
					current of jealousy exists between Mrs. Haze and Lolita, above and
					beyond the usual tensions between mother and daughter. Charlotte’s
					attraction to Humbert parallels Humbert’s attraction to Lolita,
					as neither will see the true nature of the object of their affections.
					When Lolita kisses Humbert, he is ecstatic—Lolita has become real
					to him, rather than just a dream. Yet, given her typically adolescent
					temperament, most adults would venture that her crush is of the
					schoolgirl variety and unlikely to develop into a serious adult
					love. Humbert prolongs the crush through his manipulation of her. 

Humbert believes his life is controlled by the odd, unpredictable presence
					of McFate, his word for the particularly American
					brand of fate that he believes explains the repeated patterns and
					coincidences in his life. For Humbert, McFate wields its power arbitrarily,
					bringing him to Lolita after Mrs. Phalen’s accident but then thwarting their
					time together, such as with the planned trip to Hourglass Lake. McFate
					also works in more subtle ways. For example, the Hazes live at 342
					Lawn Street, and Humbert and Lolita will later stay at Room 342
					in the Enchanted Hunters Hotel, and will eventually visit 342 hotels.
					Also, McFate continually brings Humbert into contact with Clare
					Quilty. Though he has not yet appeared physically in the narrative,
					Quilty is never far from Humbert. Quilty is the celebrity whom Lolita
					adores, and whom Humbert resembles. When Humbert gets a toothache,
					Charlotte recommends Dr. Ivor Quilty, Clare Quilty’s uncle. Humbert
					relies on McFate to explain the inexplicable and to give order to
					his life. Similarly, Nabokov uses McFate to hide clues and highlight
					thematic patterns in the novel.

