Robert Jordan thinks to himself as he walks back
					from Primitivo’s post. He struggles with the conflict between wanting
					to follow orders and believing that the orders are useless. He remembers
					his family. His mother bullied his weak father, who finally committed
					suicide with the same rifle that his own father had used in the
					American Civil War.

As Robert Jordan imagines a tremendous success in the
					next day’s offensive, he realizes that the bridge-blowing operation
					won’t be called off because those making the decision won’t be able
					to help themselves from imagining the same success he imagines.
					The certainty calms him down.

Robert Jordan and Maria lie in his sleeping bag together.
					Maria says that she is sore, so they decide not to have intercourse,
					although Robert Jordan privately thinks that this bad luck the night
					before blowing up the bridge is a bad sign. Maria offers to bring
					him to orgasm some other way, but he declines. 

Robert Jordan says that he’d rather not talk about the
					present, so they imagine their future life in Madrid. Their reverie
					is briefly interrupted when Maria reveals that Pilar predicted that
					they would all die tomorrow. Pilar’s indiscretion angers Robert
					Jordan.

Maria then talks about the day she was captured. The Fascists shot
					both of her parents against a wall. Her father was the mayor of their
					town, and his last words were for the Republic. Maria’s mother’s
					last words were about Maria’s father. The Fascists cut off Maria’s
					hair, gagged her with her own braids, drew the letters UHP (Unión
					de Hermanos Proletarios, a Communist association) on her forehead,
					and then took her into her father’s office and took turns raping
					her. Maria wants Robert Jordan to know that she struggled
					the whole time, and that Pilar suggested that the violent incident
					may have left Maria infertile. Robert Jordan promises that they
					will get married. After she falls asleep, he calms his anger by
					telling himself that both sides have committed atrocities in the
					war. He wishes that they could have made love and admires Maria’s
					mother’s last words. 

In Madrid, Robert Jordan’s friend Karkov arrives at his
					apartments at the Hotel Gaylord and greets his wife and German-speaking
					mistress. Karkov finds out that the German commander has been telling everyone
					about the next day’s offensive. A puffy-eyed journalist for the
					Russian newspaper Izvestia informs Karkov that La Pasionaria (a
					Communist orator whose real name is Dolores) has brought news that
					the Fascists have been bombing their own troops near Segovia. 

In conversation with a Hungarian general, Karkov
					expresses annoyance with both the German commander’s and the journalist’s indiscretions.
					Karkov is also concerned about Robert Jordan, whom he knows to be
					working for General Golz near Segovia. The Hungarian general expects
					that Robert Jordan will send a report on the bombing but does not
					want to go to headquarters to check for a report because he does
					not feel welcome there. Karkov goes to sleep, planning to wake up
					at two in the morning to join Golz for the offensive. 

At two in the morning, Pilar wakes Robert Jordan up and
					tells him that Pablo has fled the camp with some of the dynamite
					they were to use to blow up the bridge. Although Robert Jordan is
					angry at Pilar, who was supposed to be guarding the dynamite, he
					curbs his anger because she feels terrible. Pilar feels that she
					has betrayed not only her promise to Robert Jordan but also the
					Republic. Robert Jordan goes back to sleep, planning to wake up
					at four.

Robert Jordan’s extended memories of his father and grandfather show
					how the characters in For Whom the Bell Tolls must
					work actively to overcome their pasts. Robert Jordan is saddened
					that he never knew his grandfather, who was an admired hero in the
					American Civil War, and is embarrassed by the weakness of his father, who
					committed suicide. Ultimately, though, Robert Jordan does not dwell
					on either. He forces himself to call his father a “coward” despite
					the fact that doing so is unpleasant. He constantly works through
					his memories in order to rob them of their power. Similarly, by
					engaging in sexual activity with someone she loves, Maria confronts
					her rape until it “is all gone.” Although it may seem odd to contemporary
					readers to read about characters who suppress memories as a way
					of coping with them, this ability to leave the past in the past
					and live fully in the present is one of the features of Hemingway’s
					code of values. As we have seen earlier, Robert Jordan avoids thinking
					about the people he has killed, for guilt is not productive during
					wartime. Only by actively suppressing unpleasant memories from the
					past are Hemingway’s code heroes able to cope with the unpleasant
					realities of the present.

Hemingway frequently describes Maria with natural, earthy imagery,
					showing that she represents the pull of nature in Robert Jordan’s
					life. Throughout the novel, Hemingway paints Maria in earth tones,
					with hair “the golden brown of a grain field,” “breasts like small
					hills,” and a belly button like a well on a plain. These images
					demonstrate Maria’s strong, organic connection to the earth. Indeed,
					it is during his sexual experience with Maria that the earth moves
					for Robert Jordan. One critic suggests that the earthy imagery indicates
					that Maria is the Spanish land, raped and pillaged by warring forces
					beyond her comprehension, yet always loving and soothing. Robert
					Jordan’s communion with Maria, then, is also a communion with his
					chosen country. His progression from isolation at the beginning
					of the novel toward a full union with Maria by the end is a journey
					toward a fertile, earthy affirmation of life, guided by instinct
					rather than reason. 

In the chapter set at the Hotel Gaylord, Hemingway criticizes
					the Republican leadership, whose apathy, incompetence, and factionalism
					bears a large part of the blame for the Republicans’ eventual defeat.
					Accordingly, Hemingway portrays his Republican high society characters
					as uncaring, gossipy, self-indulgent, and stupid. The setting in
					a fancy hotel contrasts starkly with the cave where Robert Jordan
					and the guerrilleros sleep, implying that Republican leaders don’t
					care about the conditions of their own people. We also see this lack
					of involvement in the Hungarian general: he says he could go to headquarters
					and find out whether Robert Jordan has sent word, but he doesn’t
					like headquarters and consequently won’t go. The general’s apathy
					seals the fate of Robert Jordan as well as countless others. Even
					those characters who are not apathetic care about the wrong things.
					The dramatic irony in La Pasionaria’s story is that the Fascists
					actually bombed El Sordo, not their own troops. But the puffy-eyed
					journalist focuses on La Pasionaria’s theatricality rather than
					on the misinterpreted content of the story. In the end, the chapter
					leaves us with the impression that the guerrilleros are the only ones
					on the Republican side who truly know what is taking place in the
					war, while the Republican leadership is frustratingly out of touch.
					We find ourselves asking the same question Hemingway and Robert
					Jordan ask: “Have there ever been people more betrayed by their
					own leaders?” 

