Billy Pilgrim is the unlikeliest of antiwar
				heroes. An unpopular and complacent weakling even before the war
				(he prefers sinking to swimming), he becomes a joke as a soldier.
				He trains as a chaplain’s assistant, a duty that earns him disgust
				from his peers. With scant preparation for armed conflict, no weapons,
				and even an improper uniform, he is thrust abruptly into duty at
				the Battle of the Bulge. The farcical spectacle created by Billy’s
				inappropriate clothing accentuates the absurdity of such a scrawny,
				mild-mannered soldier. His azure toga, a leftover scrap of stage
				curtain, and his fur-lined overcoat, several sizes too small, throw
				his incongruity into relief. They underscore a central irony: such
				a creature could walk through war, oblivious yet unscathed, while so
				many others with more appropriate attire and provisions perish.
				It is in this shocked and physically exhausted state that Billy first
				comes “unstuck in time” and begins swinging to and fro through the
				events of his life, past and future.

	Billy lives a life full of indignity and so,
				perhaps, has no great fear of death. He is oddly suited, therefore,
				to the Tralfamadorian philosophy of accepting death. This fact may
				point to an interpretation of the Tralfamadorians as a figment of
				Billy’s disturbed mind, an elaborate coping mechanism to explain
				the meaningless slaughter Billy has witnessed. By uttering “So it goes”
				after each death, the narrator, like Billy, does not diminish the
				gravity of death but rather lends an equalizing dignity to all death,
				no matter how random or ironic, how immediate or removed. Billy’s
				father dies in a hunting accident just as Billy is about to go off
				to war. So it goes. A former hobo dies in Billy’s railway car while
				declaring the conditions not bad at all. So it goes. One hundred
				thirty thousand innocent people die in Dresden. So it goes. Valencia
				Pilgrim accidentally kills herself with carbon monoxide after turning
				bright blue. So it goes. Billy Pilgrim is killed by an
				assassin’s bullet at exactly the time he has predicted, in the realization
				of a thirty-some-year-old death threat. So it goes. Billy awaits
				death calmly, without fear, knowing the exact hour at which it will
				come. In so doing, he gains a degree of control over his own dignity
				that he has lacked throughout most of his life.

The novel centers on Billy Pilgrim to a degree that excludes
				the development of the supporting characters, who exist in the text
				only as they relate to Billy’s experience of events. 

