Power is of the individual mind, but
						the mind’s power is not enough. Power of the body decides everything
						in the end, and only Might is Right. 

Sir Ector’s castle is located in the middle of a wild
					English forest called the Forest Sauvage. On a hot summer day in
					August, the Wart meets his new tutor, Merlyn, for his first lesson.
					They stand on a bridge above the castle’s moat, and the Wart wishes
					aloud that he were a fish. Merlyn transforms the Wart into a fish
					and accompanies him in the moat in the form of a large, wise-looking
					tench. At the behest of a roach—another, weaker kind of fish—they
					visit a family of fish whose matriarch is ill, and although Merlyn
					thinks she is making up her illness, he cures her all the same.
					Merlyn, who wants the Wart to learn about the dangers of absolute
					monarchy, brings him to visit the king of the moat, an enormous
					pike. The pike, who looks a little like Uncle Sam, lazily
					answers some of the Wart’s questions, affirming that power and might
					are the only two things worth living by. The pike then tries to
					eat the Wart, but the Wart swims away in the nick of time and is
					promptly changed back into a boy by Merlyn.

Kay and the Wart go hunting for rabbits. After Kay kills
					one rabbit, the Wart fires an arrow into the air. A gore-crow catches
					the arrow in the air and flies off with it. Kay solemnly pronounces
					to his angry companion that the bird must have been a witch.

One day while a sergeant at arms teaches Kay to joust,
					the Wart mentions to Merlyn that he would also like to be a knight,
					though he sadly remembers that he is destined to be Kay’s squire,
					an unknighted assistant charged with escorting and aiding knights
					on their quests. Although Merlyn seems to know that the Wart’s gloomy
					prediction is inaccurate, he keeps this knowledge to himself and
					says he will allow the Wart to see some real knights. The Wart eagerly
					picks King Pellinore, to whom he has become attached, and he is
					magically transported to a clearing in the Forest Sauvage, where
					he sees Sir Grummore Grummursum challenging Pellinore to a joust.
					The two knights engage in a cordial moment and then decide to joust, calling
					out insults to each other in the more formal high tongue. The battle
					is a silly one. Each knight is so weighed down by his armor that
					neither can hurt the other. The two knights charge at each other twice
					on horses and then a few more times on foot before missing each
					other entirely and crashing into trees. Merlyn tells the Wart that
					when the knights wake up, they will be friends. Merlyn then transports
					the Wart back to the practice ground at Sir Ector’s castle.

Growing bored, the Wart wanders around the castle. Merlyn
					turns the Wart into a merlin, a kind of hunting bird, and puts the
					Wart in the Mews with the other birds for the night. There, the
					peregrine falcon, the bird in charge, asks the Wart about his ancestry
					and challenges the Wart to prove himself. As a new member of the
					group, he must show himself worthy by perching within reach of Cully,
					the goshawk, until the other hawks have rung their bells three times. Cully,
					who is so used to killing, attacks the Wart, who barely escapes as
					the bells ring for a third time. In song, the birds hail him as
					“the King of Merlins.”

The next morning, the Wart wakes up in his own bed, and
					Kay accuses him of violating curfew the night before. The Wart refuses to
					tell Kay about the previous night, and the two begin to fight. The Wart
					receives a black eye, and Kay’s nose begins to bleed. As Kay waits
					for the blood to stop, he begins to cry because Merlyn has not given
					him any of the adventures he has given the Wart. When the Wart asks
					Merlyn why he ignores Kay, Merlyn replies with a parable. In Merlyn’s
					story, the Rabbi Jachanan and the prophet Elijah are given shelter
					by two men, one kind and one cruel. The kind man’s cow dies, and
					Elijah helps the cruel man fix a wall in his house. When the rabbi
					asks Elijah why neither man has gotten what he deserved, Elijah
					replies that if the one man had not been kind, he would have suffered
					much worse, and that if the other man had not been cruel, he would
					have fared much better. The Wart continues to demand an adventure
					for Kay. Merlyn finally relents and tells the Wart that Kay will
					have an adventure.

Each of the magical adventures that Merlyn gives the Wart
					seems designed to impart a carefully calculated lesson or set of
					lessons. The Wart learns two important lessons from his transformation
					into a perch and his adventure in the moat. First, Merlyn’s compassion toward
					the roach shows the Wart that even the meekest creatures deserve
					help, no matter how silly their ailments seem. Even more important,
					however, is the Wart’s encounter with the old pike who runs the
					moat. The old pike is the epitome of absolute might, and this portrait
					of power is unflattering. When the old and evil king pike lunges
					for the Wart, his many rows of teeth represent the sharp and cruel
					nature that necessarily accompanies absolute power. It is relevant
					that White likens the fish, with its lean, smooth jaws, to Uncle
					Sam, the iconic image of the government in the United States. Written
					in the late 1930s, while new superpower nations
					were emerging, The Once and Future King explores
					parallels between the Arthurian world and the modern one and frequently
					tries to link its morals to contemporary events.

During the Wart’s time in the Mews, he sees the murderous
					insanity of a military society. The birds all place a high premium
					on the importance of lineage and ancestry, and they refer to each
					other with military titles. Cully, who has been driven to the point
					of psychotic behavior, is referred to as Colonel, but even his military
					discipline cannot prevent him from acting on his murderous tendencies. The
					Wart demonstrates his courage in the Mews, but his success at the
					task that the birds force him to complete seems to be a hollow victory,
					and even being triumphantly hailed as “the King of Merlins” is undermined
					by the ridiculous trial he is forced to endure.

White renders the battle between King Pellinore and Sir
					Grummore Grummursum ridiculous, using it to poke fun at traditional notions
					of knighthood. The fight is relatively pointless, since the knights
					turn a cordial conversation into a joust simply to satisfy the requirements
					of their social station. There is also humor in the way the fight
					unfolds, since each man is so heavily padded that he is barely able
					to hurt the other or even see well enough to avoid running into
					a tree. The fact that both Pellinore and Sir Grummore address each
					other in the most formal medieval English is also humorous and allows
					White to mock the formal address that is traditionally found in
					Arthurian tales. Knighthood and battling play an important part
					in The Once and Future King, both for the good and
					the bad, but in this first chapter they are cast as little more
					than good-natured buffoonery.

These chapters also foreshadow both a bright future for
					the Wart and a great evil to come. When the Wart gloomily predicts
					his life as a squire, Merlyn turns away with a knowing smile. The
					fact that Merlyn teaches only the Wart tells us that the Wart is
					somehow special. Clearly, the Wart is bound for something greater
					than squirehood, but the novel gives no way of knowing that the
					Wart will become the legendary King Arthur. We learn in the novel’s
					first paragraph that Wart is a nickname for Art, which in turn is
					short for a longer name, most likely Arthur. No other allusions
					are given to the Wart’s true identity, and these moments of foreshadowing
					are our only signs that something important is on its way. The crow’s
					catching of the Wart’s arrow, however, indicates that the Wart’s
					future may also contain dark elements.  Kay’s somber statement that
					the crow is a witch suggests that black magic may soon arrive to
					counter Merlyn’s spells; the bird’s capture of the Wart’s arrow
					suggests that the omen foretells of malice for the Wart.

