Why can’t you harness Might so that it
						works for Right? . . . The Might is there, in the bad half of people,
						and you can’t neglect it.

Arthur stops by Merlyn’s room to ask his advice, but Merlyn
					tells him that the king should always summon people to him. Merlyn
					is summoned to the Royal Chamber an hour later, and he, Arthur, Kay,
					and Sir Ector talk about the idea of chivalry. Arthur tells the others
					that might does not equal right and that currently, knights do whatever
					they please while the people slaughter, torture, and rape one another.
					For example, Arthur says, there are knights like Sir Bruce Sans
					Pitié, who rides around the country killing people and carrying
					off maidens for sport. Might can be used to achieve right, Arthur
					reasons, saying that he will use force to put down the Gaelic rebellion
					and then try to harness this power for good by creating an order
					of knights that will fight for just causes.

Back in Orkney, King Pellinore, Sir Palomides, and Sir
					Grummore go hunting for a unicorn with Morgause, who is trying to
					make the three men fall in love with her. According to legend, a
					unicorn can be caught only if a virgin attracts it, but despite
					what the Orkney children think, Morgause does not fit the description.
					The boys visit St. Toirdealblach, who tells them another story about
					a witch. The Orkney boys decide to capture a unicorn to please their
					mother. They coerce a kitchen maid into playing the virgin, binding
					her to a tree in the forest. A unicorn appears and lays its head
					in the kitchen maid’s lap with grace and majesty. Agravaine, seized
					by a fit of passion, kills the unicorn, yelling incoherently that
					the girl is his mother and the unicorn has dared to put its head
					in her lap. They take the unicorn’s head home as a trophy, but Morgause
					fails to notice it, and when she learns what they have done, she
					has them whipped.

On the plain of Bedegraine, before joining in battle with
					King Lot and his forces, Arthur, Merlyn, and Kay make further plans
					for Arthur’s order of knights. Arthur decides that the knights should
					all sit at a round table, so that each of the places are equal.
					Merlyn informs Arthur that King Leodegrance, whose daughter, Guenever, eventually
					marries Arthur, has such a table. Merlyn also asks Arthur to remind
					him to warn Arthur about Guenever in the future. Kay tells Merlyn
					that he thinks it is right to start a war if he knows that a victory
					will bring a better life to the conquered people. Merlyn angrily
					tells Kay that it is much better to make ideas available than to
					force them on others. Trembling with rage, he tells Kay that he knows
					of an Austrian who shared Kay’s views and dragged the whole world
					into bloody chaos.

Sir Palomides and Sir Grummore create a costume that looks
					like the Questing Beast and then convince King Pellinore that they
					have spotted the beast on the island. Meanwhile, Morgause, her advances
					spurned, decides that she hates the knights and that she loves her
					children. Gareth runs to bring the others the good news that they
					are forgiven, and he finds them squabbling. Agravaine wants to write
					their father a letter telling him that Morgause has been cheating
					on him with the English knights. This suggestion enrages Gawaine,
					and when Agravaine pulls a knife to defend himself, Gawaine almost
					kills him. That night, as Palomides and Grummore march in costume
					to lead Pellinore on a hunt, they run into the real Questing Beast.
					The beast mistakes them for another one of its species, falls in
					love, and chases them halfway up a cliff.

The night before the battle with King Lot, Merlyn reminds
					Arthur that he will marry Guenever and that he must be wary of the
					relationship between Guenever and Lancelot. He also tells Arthur
					a parable with the moral that no one can escape fate.

In this section, with the help of Kay, Sir Ector, and
					Merlyn, King Arthur continues to think about the ideology behind
					his reign, which he hopes will thrive on fairness. The Round Table
					is a symbol of this kind of government—a society so democratic that
					even the king’s table is designed to prevent fighting and squabbling
					over status. This table is the culmination of all that Merlyn and
					his lessons have taught Arthur, even though Merlyn insists that
					Arthur will have to do some of the thinking for himself. Even though
					Arthur’s idea is noble, however, the novel never treats the project
					as something glorious or easy. Rather, it appears to be a difficult
					and tricky idea to implement. Every time we see Arthur and his advisers
					discussing the idea of might versus right, they are trying to figure
					out a way around a new obstacle, and the chapters rarely end happily. Merlyn,
					who has so far been a compassionate and caring adviser to Arthur,
					does not seem interested in making things easy for the young king
					by allowing Arthur to compromise or adopt the system already in
					place. Instead, Merlyn is driven by the age-old feuds and ethnic hatreds
					that are tearing the country apart, and he almost seems to be using
					Arthur as a weapon to right old wrongs. Life for the people of England
					may soon improve, but we wonder if Arthur is dooming himself with
					his own ideas.

White includes a contemporary historical reference in
					the text. Kay argues that might can be used if a ruler discovers
					an improved way of life and the people are too stubborn to convert.
					Merlyn responds to Kay’s theory with outrage, likening him to an
					unnamed Austrian who “tried to impose his reformation by the sword,
					and plunged the civilized world into misery and chaos.” Since Merlyn lives
					backward in time, the fact that this incident occurred in his youth
					means that it occurred during our recent past. The incident is a
					clear reference to Adolf Hitler, who as the leader of Germany from 1933 to 1945,
					ordered the execution of million of Jews, as well as Gypsies, homosexuals,
					and others, during World War II. In a story that is several centuries
					old, White is again finding lessons and parables that are relevant
					to the modern era. The problems that Arthur is trying to solve,
					White warns, still exist, and he gives us contemporary examples
					to drive his message home.

The Orkney children are described again in this section;
					as their destructive behavior increases, so does our dislike for
					their mother, Morgause. White’s biographer, Sylvia Townsend Warner,
					reports that White’s publisher rejected the initial draft of this
					novel because Morgause was depicted far too negatively. Townsend
					Warner hypothesizes that while writing about Morgause, White was
					working through some of his feelings toward his own mother, whom
					he remembered as someone who was much more willing to take love than
					to give it. Although White subsequently rewrote most of the novel,
					toning down all the references to Morgause, some of the personal
					emotion that drove the first draft still shows up in several of the
					chapters. Agravaine’s claim that the unicorn has somehow violated
					the children’s mother supports Warner’s psychological reading of
					the novel, since Agravaine’s behavior shows an unhealthy fixation
					with his mother’s sexual activity that far exceeds normal childish
					behavior. The other children also bear psychological scars, as can
					be seen in their earlier ill treatment of the donkeys, but they seem
					to be strong enough to withstand them better than Agravainedoes.
					Agravaine’s character has already been so poisoned by his uncontrollable
					love for his mother that he is willing to pull a knife on his own
					brother. With the exception of Gareth, who is a sweet and sensitive
					child, the Orkney children fight in the most violent and disagreeable
					ways, but it is hard to feel anything but sorry for them since they
					have been so distorted by the evil Morgause.

The satire of knighthood, which begins in Book I with
					the portrayal of Pellinore’s battle with Sir Grummore, continues
					here with the description of the silly and lighthearted adventures
					of Palomides, Pellinore, and Grummore. The adventures of the three knights
					also provide comic relief from the unhappiness that prevails in
					Morgause’s castle. The Once and Future King is
					primarily a sad and contemplative novel, but it also tries to engage
					its readers, and the adventures of Palomides, Pellinore, and Grummore
					provide comic interludes that do not distract too much from the
					novel’s weightier matters.

