As her time at the hospital approaches its end, Kaysen
					begins to plan her next steps. She thinks back to the job she held
					before hospitalization—typing student bills at Harvard. Kaysen was
					surprised by the sexism she encountered there. The typing and supervisory
					staff was strictly segregated by gender, and the male and female
					staff was subject to different rules. Women obeyed a conservative
					dress code and were not allowed to smoke except in the bathroom,
					while men enjoyed much more freedom. Eventually, Kaysen simply stopped going
					to work. She notes that she was the only woman on the job who objected
					to the rules and wonders whether this was a mark of illness or a
					just reaction to sexism. Finally, the job search is put to rest
					by her boyfriend’s proposition of marriage.

Kaysen describes meeting her husband before she entered
					the hospital. A friend’s brother introduced her to him. They watched
					a French film and spent the night together. After her future husband
					returned to Reed College, Kaysen began the mental decline that led
					her to McLean. He insisted on visiting her in the hospital, despite
					her worsening situation and occasional refusal to see him. Over
					time, Kaysen’s mental health improved, and she was able to visit
					him outside the grounds of the hospital. Eventually, he proposed
					marriage. Kaysen admits that she had given the realities of marriage
					very little thought before accepting his proposal. To her, marriage
					was escape and freedom. The marriage eventually ended in divorce.

Kaysen considers the relative importance of the “brain,”
					composed of a series of complex neurochemical processes, and the
					“mind,” the invisible mechanism that creates consciousness. She
					isn’t sure whether the two can be divided. Perhaps there are two
					levels of interpretation occurring in our heads, she theorizes,
					one that processes basic data, and another that considers it. She
					imagines that mental illness appears when the two interpreters can’t
					communicate. Sometimes, however, confusion exists that doesn’t indicate mental
					illness. People might sense that a train in which they’re sitting,
					although stopped in a station, is moving, simply because the train
					next to them is moving. Kaysen describes this gray area as the edge
					of psychiatric disturbance. She points out that treatable mental illness
					is always signaled by a patient’s doubts about what she is seeing
					or imagining. Those who do not doubt are most likely untreatable.
					Kaysen draws a distinction between therapists, who treat the mind,
					and physicians, who prescribe psychoactive medications. She considers
					the long-term effects on patient treatment caused by neurochemists.

With her twentieth birthday approaching, Kaysen prepares
					to leave McLean. The employment opportunities available to her are
					undesirable and remind Kaysen of her brief employment as a typist
					in a Harvard office. There, she noticed that typists (all women)
					and supervisors (all men) obeyed entirely different sets of rules.
					The experience was a crystal-clear example to Kaysen of the overt
					sexism still in practice in the American workplace. Kaysen wonders why
					she was the only employee to object to the rules. Was this a sign of
					her illness? This episode illustrates one of the book’s major themes—that
					of society’s insistence on classifying those who reject conventional
					behavioral norms as odd or crazy. She encounters a similar response
					from her social worker at the hospital. The adults around her have
					a difficult time understanding why Kaysen rebuffs the job opportunities
					typically available to a woman of her age at that time. Even Valerie,
					now a confidante of sorts, tries to steer her toward a career as
					a dental technician. The world in Kaysen’s eyes operates similarly
					to the typing office: women should expect to take up an undemanding
					service job and to live within a set of boundaries set by men. Only
					a marriage proposal, the most traditional role for women, releases
					Kaysen from the hospital and earns the approval of everyone around
					her.

Kaysen decides to marry with little thought of consequences. Marriage
					is socially palatable to her parents and doctors. Once married,
					questions about Kaysen’s life choices and future will subside; traditional
					society will consider her life’s path settled. More importantly,
					the marriage proposal is Kaysen’s instant ticket out of psychiatric
					care. “I guess my life will just stop when I get married,” she says.
					Certainly Kaysen’s life will continue, but probing questions about
					her prospects will indeed cease. 

The psychiatric establishment’s growing reliance on neurochemical
					solutions to mental illness interests Kaysen. Pharmaceutical remedies
					have replaced entire classes of mental illness that once required
					lengthy therapy. Most forms of depression and manic depression no
					longer require long periods of hospitalization; the nearly two years
					that Kaysen spent in a residential program would be unheard of today,
					except in the most dire cases of illness. Kaysen believes that the mind interprets
					chemical processes that occur in the brain. This
					interpreter gives us a rough report of the brain’s actions and reactions
					to stimuli. Kaysen thinks that there are countless interpreters
					checking the work of the one that came before, thereby refining
					our conclusions about what we see. Mental illness occurs when there
					is a break in the interpretive chain, resulting in “false impressions
					have all the hallmarks of reality.” She notes that Freud believed
					that patients who had no doubts about their own delusions were untreatable.
					Ultimately, Kaysen looks at the gap between the therapeutic and
					neurochemical schools of thought with some alarm. More cooperation
					between the two would, in her opinion, be better for patients.

