Chamberlain raised his saber, let loose
						the shout that was the greatest sound he could make, boiling the
						yell up from his chest: Fix bayonets! Charge!

	Afternoon, south of Gettysburg. Chamberlain
					and his men are finally called upon to move, just as the Confederate
					attack begins. Chamberlain forms his regiment and waits for his
					orders. His commanding officer, Colonel Vincent, finally begins
					the march. As the men move forward, they begin to come within range
					of the artillery exchange. Chamberlain orders his brother Tom to
					move to the rear of the regiment, before it becomes “a hard day
					for mother.” The regiment passes Big Round Top and begins to move
					up onto Little Round Top. Vincent places Chamberlain’s regiment,
					the Twentieth Maine, on the southeastern side of Little Round Top.
					He tells Chamberlain, “You are the extreme left of the Union line.
					. . . The line runs from here all the way back to Gettysburg. But
					it stops here. . . . You cannot withdraw. Under any conditions.
					If you go, the line is flanked. . . . You must defend this place
					to the last.”

	Chamberlain’s men immediately begin digging in, piling
					up rocks to build a stone wall. Chamberlain orders one of his men,
					Morrill, to take his company farther out to the left, in case the
					Confederates try to go around the Twentieth Maine and surprise them
					from the side. Chamberlain goes to the top of the hill and sees
					that the Union forces in the peach orchard are being overrun and
					that the Confederates will soon reach Little Round Top. He returns
					to his regiment. He tells the six prisoners from the former Second
					Maine that if they join the regiment now, there will be no charges.
					Three of the men take him up on the offer.

	The infamous “Rebel yell” is heard, and the Confederate
					forces are on their way. Chamberlain finally realizes that he is
					the end of the Union line and that he has been ordered never to
					retreat.

	The Confederates attack. The Twentieth Maine succeeds
					in repelling the initial charge. Chamberlain tries to reach Morrill
					to see if he and his company are all right, but a second attack
					quickly follows the first. This time, Kilrain is shot, but the wound
					seems slight, just under his armpit. Chamberlain jumps up on a rock
					and is promptly knocked down by a shot that lands near his foot.
					His foot hurts, but there is no hole in the boot. He climbs up on
					another boulder to get a better view and is shot again. This time
					the bullet glances off his sword scabbard.

	Chamberlain calls all the commanders to him and orders
					them to hold the line. He says that they are about to be flanked
					on the left and that they have to stop the Confederates at all costs.
					He outlines a strategic maneuver, and the commanders quickly leave
					to execute his orders. Chamberlain returns to Kilrain, who is becoming
					weaker from his wound.

	The Twentieth is beginning to run
					out of ammunition. The next attack hits hard all along the line.
					Chamberlain’s men hold, but they are running very low on bullets.
					The next attack knocks a hole in the line, and Chamberlain instinctively
					orders the nearest man to fill it—his brother Tom. Tom survives
					the attack without injury.

	The Twentieth Maine is now down to 200 men,
					having lost a hundred in the battle. The regiment does not have
					enough ammunition to handle another attack. Therefore, Chamberlain
					decides to order the men to fix their bayonets to their rifles and
					charge down the hill in a motion “like a swinging door” to sweep
					the Confederates away. Screaming, Chamberlain leads his men down
					the hill, and the plan works amazingly well, as the beleaguered
					Confederates flee in terror from the charging Union troops. As they
					try to escape, they run into Morrill’s company. Many of the retreating
					Confederates are soon either dead, wounded, or taken prisoner.

	Chamberlain returns to Kilrain, who has been shot in
					the arm again. Kilrain praises the job Chamberlain has done. Chamberlain meets
					up with Colonel Rice, the new brigade commander since Vincent was
					killed during the battle. Rice is very impressed with the bayonet
					charge.

	The regiment has suffered casualties in nearly a third
					of its men. Kilrain is taken away to receive first aid, and Rice
					asks Chamberlain to move his men to Big Round Top. There will be
					no more fighting for them that day.

The fight on Little Round Top is one of the
					most famous fights in the most famous battle of the Civil War. A
					single regiment, led by a professor-turned-colonel, is ordered to
					defend the extreme left flank of the Union army at all costs. They
					cannot retreat—if they do, the Confederates will quickly come around
					behind the Union lines and attack from the rear. The chapter’s central
					position in the book highlights the importance of the fighting at
					Little Round Top. The narrative also lionizes Chamberlain and his
					regiment. There are only two descriptions of combat in the book
					from observers actually in the midst of battle: Chamberlain at Little Round
					Top and, later, Lew Armistead during Pickett’s Charge. Chamberlain’s
					description is fast and action-oriented—it is likely that Shaara
					conceived much of the novel around the fighting at Little Round
					Top. The chapter moves at a breathless pace, culminating in the
					climactic bayonet charge. The chapter can almost serve as a short
					story by itself, with rising action, a climax, and falling action.

	The narrator’s description of Chamberlain’s
					thoughts in sentence fragments gives us a sense of the quick-paced,
					confusing nature of combat: “He was knocked clean off the rock.
					Dirt and leaves in his mouth. Rolling over. This is ridiculous.
					Hands pulled him up.” The swift action is broken up with scenes between
					Chamberlain and his men, particularly his brother Tom and Kilrain.
					These scenes give the chapter a plot beyond simply a recounting
					of historical details, and explain exactly what is going on between
					the sentence fragments: which soldiers are killed, what angle the
					Confederates attack from or are going to attack from, and how many
					bullets the Union soldiers have left. The breaks also give the characters
					a chance to reflect on the battle and give some meaning to it—Chamberlain’s
					awareness of the fact that he cannot retreat under any circumstances
					lends psychological urgency to both the plot and his character.

	The fact that both Tom and Chamberlain are
					fighting in the same regiment gives Shaara a way to reflect on the
					effect of war on family relationships. Tom’s presence causes a great
					crisis for Chamberlain during the battle. Chamberlain realizes that
					the presence of a sibling “weakens a man” in combat when he hesitates
					to put his brother in a dangerous strategic position. He does so,
					but the action haunts Chamberlain for the rest of his life, and he
					writes about the experience in his memoirs of the war. Ultimately,
					Chamberlain decides to send his brother to another regiment, for
					two reasons: first, he cannot depend on himself to make the right
					decisions regarding Tom; and second, it is better to put distance
					between the two of them so that the odds of both of them dying at
					the same time are decreased.

