The novel’s protagonist, guardian of Sofia, grandson of Grand Duke Demidov and Countess, and brother of Helena. The Count is an aristocrat sentenced to a lifetime confinement in the Metropol Hotel by a Bolshevik tribunal, spared only because the poem Where Is It Now? is attributed to him. He uses the gentlemanly ways of his former life to adapt and survive in the rapidly changing times. 

Friend of the Count and mother of Sofia. Nina boldly approaches the Count for the first time as a little girl to inquire about his shorn mustache. They become friends thereafter, embarking on adventures through the hidden places in the hotel, and Nina gifts the Count the hotel master key. When Nina is an adult, she defects from the Bolsheviks and is sent away to Siberia, but not without first entrusting Sofia to the Count’s care.

Daughter of Nina and ward of the Count. Sofia comes to the Count as a five-year-old, turns his world upside down, and allows him to find his greater purpose. It is her talent that opens the door for both of them to escape.

Girlfriend of the Count. Anna, described often as the “willowy woman,” is a successful actress with connections in high places. The Count and Anna become lovers and Anna plays a motherly role to Sofia. 

Friend of the Count. Mishka is the true author of Where Is It Now? but could not publish the poem under his name for fear of execution. He is the only person left who knows the Count from before his time at the Metropol. His ideals are in line with the Bolsheviks at the start, but when they begin to censor art, he rebels.

The antagonist of the story. The Bishop starts out as a waiter, but with powerful friends in the Party, works his way up to manager of the Metropol. He makes it his focus to challenge and destroy the traditions of the aristocracy and the Count.

A friend of the Count. Andrey is the maître d’ of the Metropol’s fine dining restaurant dubbed the Boyarsky.

A friend of the Count. Emile is the head chef of the Boyarsky.

A friend of the Count. Marina is the seamstress of the Metropol.

A friend of the Count. Glebnikov is a former Colonel of the Red Army and current officer of the secret police. He tasks the Count with teaching him the ways of gentlemen in order to improve diplomacy with the West.

A friend of the Count. Richard meets the Count at the Metropol when he is there as an American aide-de-camp to a general. Richard later enlists the Count’s help with procuring intel about the Russian regime. 

A friend of the Count. Abram is the roofer of the Metropol who shares the honey from his beehive on the roof.

The sister of the Count.

The grandfather of the Count.

The grandmother of the Count.

The adversary of the Count. It is his death that sends the Count to Paris.

The piano teacher of Sofia and the conductor at the Piazza.

The wife of Mishka.

The Soviet leader from 1922 to 1952.

The successor to Stalin as the Soviet premier.

