Another hypothesis of what happened to Kathy stems from her trip to Boston for the affair with Harmon. She had to keep the secret in the years after, and she couldn’t take it any longer, so she committed suicide. Kathy had certainly been under pressure from the election, John’s past, and her unwanted abortion. Maybe she’d had enough disappointment and sadness. Kathy could have taken an overdose beforehand. She might have been thinking about her last trip with Harmon and how she’d ended the relationship because she loved her husband. Before killing herself, she couldn’t even remember much about Harmon. She did remember being drawn to the possibility of being happy again.

When Kathy got back to Minneapolis, John came in as she was cooking dinner. He didn’t ask many questions about the trip, which she claimed was to visit a high school friend. Through conversation, John revealed that he didn’t even realize she was home a day early. Although Kathy wanted to get back at John for all he’d done, she decided he would never know her secret. She wondered if any of it really mattered. Kathy might have blamed herself for their failed marriage and her unhappiness because she stopped trying and gave up on her dreams. Maybe Kathy died in the lake with no answers to why she even committed suicide.

This chapter includes quotations from friends and family as well as sources further removed. People, like Vinny, Ruth, and Myra, continue to debate what happened to Kathy. Eleanor reveals several nicknames John’s father used to call John. She hints that she knows someone hurt John, and she wonders if it helped John feel better to call himself Sorcerer. Eleanor also wonders why the narrator continues to ask her questions. Pat acknowledges that Kathy’s affair would have hurt John, but she also expresses frustration that no one thinks about Kathy’s issues. Tony states that John ran out of magic once people found out about his past.

The brutality and lasting impacts of war remain a focus. The men of Charlie Company justify the massacre as revenge for their slain friends. A newspaper shares the death of a Thuan Yen veteran who became a homeless alcoholic. Soldiers from different periods are seen engaging in savagery, including efforts to exterminate American Indian tribes.

The final footnote belongs to the narrator, who explores whether it is meaningful to ask what happened in the first place. The narrator knows that people want certainty but that they also love mystery. Despite years of research, the narrator can’t say what happened to John and Kathy. Their disappearance was a magic trick.

Taken together, Chapters 24 and 25 create a sense of the need to move on and accept that some things will never be known. For all the hints the narrator has provided about Kathy’s affair with the dentist, in Chapter 24, which is the only chapter that directly discusses it, readers learn some new information. Few details are given, but this technique is deliberate. Harmon remains an indistinct figure because that’s how Kathy perceived him. His only importance is in his relationship with Kathy and John and their bond. Perhaps Harmon was there to make John value Kathy, or perhaps he was there because Kathy was desperately trying to be happy again. Either way, the ruse failed.

Chapter 25, another “Evidence” chapter, also indicates a sense of things coming to an end. Both Vinny and Ruth are firmly locked in their opinion about Kathy, leading readers to wonder what is the sense in continuing to share their ideas. Anything else they have to say clearly won’t prove anything new. Quotes from Pat and Eleanor, along with the narrator’s footnote, go a step further, asking why people are even still talking about Kathy’s disappearance. If the narrator and the evidence provide the bulk of the material about Kathy’s disappearance, it seems apparent that Pat is correct when she proclaims that Kathy’s fate will never be known.

One interesting opposition appears, juxtaposing information shared in previous chapters. The earlier conversation between Kathy and Tony at the casino suggested that John knew some of the truth about Kathy’s affair, and Pat confirms this, both in her quote presented in “Evidence” when she says that Kathy’s affair hurt John badly and in her conversation with John upon her arrival at the cottage. But in Chapter 24, a hypothetical Kathy states that she will never tell John about Harmon. If that latter is true, perhaps Kathy wants a secret of her own. She knows how much she has suffered in spending a life with a man who is withholding truths, information, and emotions. Perhaps forcing John into the same situation is Kathy’s best form of vengeance.

