Steve Harmon is the narrator as well as the protagonist of Monster. Steve tells his story through entries in his notebook and a screenplay about his experience. Steve sees himself as both a moviemaker and a character in his own movie.

Steve expresses his shock, pain, and fear over prison violence and his panic about the outcome of his trial, but as his trial progresses, Steve examines himself more critically. He questions his motives and starts to confront the consequences of his past decisions. Steve sees James King and Osvaldo Cruz in court and recalls his previous encounters with them. He remembers how Cruz taunted him and how King tried to recruit him for the robbery. Steve admits he once wanted to be tough like King and Cruz.

Steve wants to feel like a good person. This means not only being able to absolve himself of guilt but also feeling that others believe in him. Steve knows most people have already judged him guilty. Even his parents have doubts. Steve especially worries about the doubts of Kathy O’Brien, his lawyer. He makes friendly overtures toward O’Brien, but O’Brien maintains an emotional distance, leaving Steve feeling isolated and even more afraid.

The longer Steve is in jail, the more he becomes aware of how much he looks and sounds like his fellow prisoners. At the same time, O’Brien urges Steve to separate himself from other young Black men in the eyes of the jury. Steve follows the advice of both the prisoners and O’Brien. With the help of Mr. Sawicki, his film teacher and character witness, Steve makes a good impression on the witness stand. But after the not guilty verdict, when Steve reaches out to hug O’Brien, she turns away. Steve expresses his feeling of rejection through an image from a monster movie.

The jury’s decision of not guilty frees Steve from prison but not from his feelings of alienation and guilt. The story leaves unresolved whether Steve Harmon is a good or bad person and whether he is innocent of the crime. After the trial, Steve himself tries to resolve these questions by continuing to make movies.

