The people who supply food coupons to the annex are arrested.
					The residents’ only alternative is the black-market ration books
					they have, and the food they must eat is horrible. Miep gets sick
					with the flu, and Jan says it is impossible to see a doctor. Anne
					says that she is more restless than Peter because he has his own
					room, while she has to share one with Mr. Dussel.

Anne and Margot are both growing annoyed with their parents. Anne
					complains that her parents are not open about sex and sexuality.
					She and Margot exchange letters. Margot writes that she is somewhat
					jealous of Anne’s relationship with Peter, but only because she
					also wants someone with whom she can share her feelings. Anne is
					growing happier with her relationship with Peter but cannot fathom
					ever marrying him.

	Anne decides to ask Peter about sex, since she believes
					“he knows everything,” and later she talks to Margot in the bathroom.
					Peter overhears them and thinks Anne only spoke to him to tease
					him, but she tells him it is untrue. Anne says she would like to
					ask if Peter knows about female genitalia, and she writes a description
					of her own anatomy in her diary.

	Anne’s mother forbids Anne from going up to see Peter
					because Mrs. van Daan is jealous. Peter invites Margot to come upstairs
					with Anne. Listening to the radio at the end of March, Anne hears
					a member of the Dutch government in exile propose a collection of
					Dutch people’s diaries and letters after the war. Anne writes that
					everyone in the annex immediately thought of her diary. She wonders
					what would happen if she published a novel about the annex, and
					thinks that ten years after the war people would find her diary
					very interesting. To pass the time, Anne continues writing stories
					and describes some of them in her diary. She also writes about her
					hobbies, such as genealogy and mythology. Food is growing scarce
					and there are no vegetables left.

Anne is talking to Peter one night when another break-in
					occurs. Mr. van Daan tries to scare the burglars away by shouting
					“Police!” but the residents see someone shine a flashlight through
					a gap in the wall and hear footsteps running away. Anne is terrified,
					thinking the Gestapo is about to come for them. The residents lie
					on the floor, petrified, and hear footsteps on the stairs and a
					rattling at the bookcase that hides the door to the annex. The noises
					stop but someone has left the light in front of the bookcase on.

Mrs. van Daan worries about the police finding the radio
					downstairs, and Otto Frank worries they will find Anne’s diary.
					Anne writes, “If my diary goes, I go too.” The adults phone Mr.
					Kleiman and wait in suspense until a knock comes on the door. They
					cry with relief when they see it is only Jan and Miep. Anne wonders
					why the Jews have been singled out for death. She decides that after
					the war she will become a Dutch citizen because she loves Holland
					and the Dutch. She writes, “If God lets me live . . . I’ll make
					my voice heard.”

As the danger increases, Anne’s perspective about her
					future continues to mature. She continually shifts back and forth
					between feeling that she is about to die and making plans for her
					future. The closest encounter thus far with the police makes Anne
					contemplate death more seriously. The possibility of the family
					being discovered only increases with time, and the inhabitants take
					turns contemplating how they will behave when they are arrested.
					Anne begins to worry that she will not live to accomplish any of
					the things she hopes to, like writing a novel or pursuing her hobbies.
					However, she continues to think about her future and decides how
					she will identify herself after the war.

Although at the beginning of the diary she saw herself
					as a child, Anne is now beginning to discover her place in the world
					and see herself as an adult. In an early entry, on June 20, 1942,
					she had written, “It seems to me that later on neither I nor anyone
					else will be interested in the musings of a thirteen-year-old schoolgirl,”
					because she did not think her thoughts were important for anyone
					except herself. Now, however, she is starting to become aware of
					the broader significance of her experience and realizes the potential value
					of sharing her words with others. With a newfound understanding
					of her own mortality, Anne recognizes the injustice of her fate
					more fully. She also realizes the value of her diary and her personal
					thoughts, and she expresses her hope that her diary will reach people
					after the war. Anne’s written words about this hope are what convince
					her father to share the diary with others.

	Otto Frank understandably chose to omit several passages
					from this section, including those concerning Anne’s sexual curiosity.
					He believed that these were personal thoughts and were not necessarily suitable
					for a young-adult audience. These moments in which Anne expresses
					her sexuality are very important. We see Anne as a girl, rather
					than a sort of sterilized saint or victimized martyr. While Anne
					is a unique and remarkable individual with a tragic experience,
					we also see her as a normal girl, with typical human fears and desires.
					If Anne’s diary entries focused only on the war or her hiding, we
					would feel less connected to her tragedy. However, Anne intersperses
					her thoughts about death and the war with accounts of time spent
					with Peter and her growing sexuality. We feel a greater connection
					and identification with Anne, and her tragedy causes even more emotional
					impact.

