In London, George books an expensive hotel suite. After a lavish dinner, Amelia visits her parents while George goes to the theater. The Sedleys greet Amelia warmly. While her mother is getting tea ready, Amelia reflects that she thought marriage would bring her complete happiness, but instead she finds herself discontented and jealous of Becky. Since Amelia doesn’t want her parents to know of her unhappiness, she suppresses these feelings.

The next day, George goes to his father’s lawyer to get his 2,000 pounds. He has little worries about spending it too quickly because he is confident that he and his father will reconcile. Mr. Osborne’s lawyer receives him coolly. He gives George a check for the sum. While George thinks he is better than everyone in the office, the people in the office gossip about him and his situation.

The next day, Amelia and George drive to Chatham, where the regiment is stationed. They are met by Jos and Dobbin. A letter from Peggy O’Dowd, the major’s wife, awaits Amelia, asking her to join them that evening for a party. Several minutes later, Mrs. O’Dowd shows up, eager to meet Amelia. Mrs. O’Dowd says that the regiment is all one big family. The men leave the women, and Mrs. O’Dowd tells Amelia about all the women. At first the other women like Amelia, but once they see how popular she is among the men, they start criticizing her. Overall, Amelia enjoys the party.

Two days later, the regiment ships out to Belgium, while Amelia and Mrs. O’Dowd travel on a separate boat with Jos. They make their way to Brussels, where there is much to see and do. Amelia’s first few weeks are filled with outings, sightseeing, and even socializing with snobby aristocrats. They stay in hotels, not army quarters. One day, while accompanied by Major and Mrs. O’Dowd, Amelia and George see General Tufto, which means that Becky and Rawdon are in Belgium. The day suddenly loses its luster for Amelia.

Amelia and George soon encounter Becky and Rawdon. That evening they all attend the opera. George visits Becky in the general’s box, much to General Tufto’s displeasure, and then accompanies her to Amelia’s box. Becky succeeds in making the general jealous, and Dobbin complains to George about her behavior.

Within days, George, Becky, and Rawdon are spending a lot of time together. George gambles with Rawdon, losing money. He chastises Amelia for being unfriendly to Becky, while Becky claims Amelia is jealous and mocks her. Amelia is quietly miserable with George’s neglect, but George tells himself she is clueless.

A few weeks later, George takes Amelia to an elite ball but then leaves her alone. Becky, making a stunning late arrival, spies Amelia and deluges her with criticisms. George joins them but then goes off to dance with Becky and pass her a secret note. Amelia pretends not to feel well, so Dobbin escorts her home.

Meanwhile, the men learn that the regiments are heading to war in three hours. At first, George is excited but then turns introspective. He realizes that he has been a poor husband. He regrets disobeying his father and writes a letter of farewell. George goes into the bedroom to look at Amelia. As he bends down, Amelia puts her arms around his neck.

As George and Amelia prepare to go overseas, readers discern that George hasn’t gained any wisdom from his recent experiences. Clearly, with no support from his father or significant income, he will be unable to survive spending money the way he does upon their return to London. But George fails to see this truth because, for him, everything is about appearance. Just as George feels emotions only on a shallow level—as demonstrated throughout his relationship with Amelia—he also perceives the world around him on the surface level. George must book an expensive hotel room. He must appear to be a man of wealth. He takes this creed so seriously that he doesn’t even want Amelia to visit her parents because they are now poor.

George has not been brought up to do anything other than act in the manner he believes becomes a gentleman. However, he has no concept that the term “gentleman” does not refer only to having money and the finer things in life. Though a gentleman, George still carouses in the evenings and speaks rudely to other people. Unfortunately, Amelia continues to let his sensibility override her intuition. While Amelia admits to herself that George is not the man she thought he was, she always returns to him and even supports his values. Amelia’s discernment of George’s faults never leads her to question her commitment to him.

Once introduced to the regiment, Amelia enjoys her new situation far more than leading the life of faux luxury with George. She is warmly embraced by the effusive Mrs. O’Dowd, who is certainly a more genuine person than George despite her exaggerations. In Belgium, readers hardly see a hint of war on the European continent. Instead, life in Belgium among the army and its entourage revolves around tourist outings, parties, sightseeing, and even social climbing. Brussels is such a nonstop party that Jos, who chaperoned Amelia and Mrs. O’Dowd on their journey to Belgium, decides to remain and join in on the fun. Readers may anticipate the horror of the battlefield, but at this point, the Osbornes certainly do not.

Once Becky arrives, Amelia’s mood turns grim. Becky, however, has little time for Amelia other than to make her feel small and unattractive. Instead, Becky is busy parceling out her affections, always with a purpose. In the past, she sought to attract only those people who could give her something, particularly access to wealthier people or a future in which she had money. In Brussels, Becky continues this pattern. From General Tufto, she gets presents and possibly even a free place to stay for her and Rawdon. From George, she gets the money he loses to Rawdon gambling every night. From both of these men, Becky receives the focused attention that helps build her persona in Brussels. Becky is a chronic social climber and always has her eye on the people who can help her bootstrap herself upward. Her popularity helps propel her into the limelight at the ball, which is populated by dukes and duchesses.

George recognizes that Becky is pursuing him, but instead of giving a thought as to why, he simply attributes her actions to his charisma. George views himself as a “woman-killer” with a history, despite his long engagement to Amelia, so he thinks Becky can’t help but be drawn to him. George does have moments of introspection. He is aware that Becky is saying terrible things about Amelia, but he decides her words don’t matter in the face of Becky’s attractiveness and her pursuit of him.

Ironically, throughout George’s relationship with Amelia, he wanted her only when she was unavailable, notably when his father broke off their engagement. Contrarily, Becky makes herself highly available to George, which increases his ardor to the point that he even passes her a secret note. It seems that George is attracted to Becky because she is the anti-Amelia. Becky is socially adept, clever, light, and the quintessential belle of the ball, whereas Amelia is shy, serious, and thoughtful. In Brussels, where life revolves around fun until the moment the army sets off to war, Becky is a hit and Amelia is a bust. George, always drawn to women and entertainments, thinks little about his new bride until his imminent departure for war makes him feel shame and guilt for the way he has treated Amelia. The reader may wonder if it is too little, too late.

