Although the novel’s introductory and concluding passages
				are told from the narrator’s point of view, the bulk of the novel
				unfolds from Ethan Frome’s perspective and centers on his actions.
				Whereas the other characters in the narrative remain opaque, we
				are allowed access to all of Ethan’s thoughts as his life approaches
				a crisis. He can be seen as the protagonist of the story. In spite
				of the fact that Ethan contemplates an adulterous affair, Wharton
				renders him a generally sympathetic character by making extreme
				efforts to depict his wife, Zeena, as an appallingly unsympathetic
				figure. Even if we don’t condone Ethan’s desire for another woman,
				we understand his motivations. We never doubt his fundamental goodness.
				Ethan’s illicit passion for Mattie Silver coexists with a moral
				sense strong enough to keep him from going beyond a few embraces
				and kisses.

Though sympathetic, Ethan remains a frustrating main character.
				Wharton’s novel emphasizes two themes: the conflict between passion
				and social convention, and the constricting effects that a harsh
				winter climate can have on the human spirit. These themes almost
				seem to conspire to make Ethan a passive, unhappy victim of circumstance,
				weighed down by his duty to his wife, his bitter existence as a
				poor farmer, and the strain that Starkfield’s frozen landscape places
				on his soul. “Guess he’s been in Starkfield too many winters,” an
				old local tells the narrator. This assessment seems to be Wharton’s
				epitaph for her protagonist, who is forced—like the original Ethan
				Frome and his wife, Endurance, in the graveyard—to endure rather
				than to act. His entire life becomes a series of dreams destroyed
				by circumstance. Zeena’s illness and his poverty crush his desire
				for wider horizons, which we see in his hope to leave Starkfield
				and in his interest in chemistry and engineering. His desire for Mattie
				is likewise crushed by his inability either to break free of Zeena
				or to muster the courage to defy convention and risk ruin.

Ethan is a sensitive man, a lover of nature, and a basically
				decent person, but he lacks emotional strength and so is mastered
				by circumstances. It is appropriate, then, that his only bold decision
				in the entire novel is to commit suicide—a decision that Mattie
				pushes on him and thus, in fact, contains little courage. Rather,
				his final, mad sled ride to disaster constitutes the ultimate expression
				of passivity: unable to face the consequences of any decision,
				he elects to attempt to escape all decisions forever.

