Becky is put in charge of overseeing the renovation of the Crawleys’ London house. Pitt comes to town, and Becky invites him to stay in their house. Although she charms him, he gets defensive when she brings up money. Pitt knows how poor his brother’s family is, but he gives Becky only a small sum of money for Rawdy, which Becky allots for their landlord. Rawdy, now eight years old, hates his mother. One day she discovers him listening as she sings for Lord Steyne. Becky hits Rawdy for spying. The narrator hints that the servants believe that Becky and Lord Steyne are having an affair.

The family goes to Queen’s Crawley for Christmas. Becky wants to leave Rawdy at home, but Rawdon overrules her. After arriving and getting settled in their rooms, the family gathers at the dinner table. Rawdy chats with Lady Jane and tells her he likes to dine there because at home he doesn’t eat with his parents.

Pitt works hard to repair the damage his father did to the Crawley name. Becky inspires him to distinguish himself politically and socially. At Christmas, the whole family gathers at the house. Rawdy becomes good friends with his cousins. He loves Lady Jane and sits next to her every evening. Responding to this situation, Becky puts on a show of affection, but Rawdy announces that she never kisses him at home. After the Crawleys return to London, Becky finishes Pitt’s house renovations, and Pitt takes up residence while Parliament is in session. He discusses his political career with Becky daily, troubling Lady Jane, whom he ignores. Becky grows openly contemptuous of Lady Jane, finding her too simple and sweet. Becky makes fun of Lady Jane and Pitt to Lord Steyne. Rawdon grows isolated, spending time with friends and Rawdy, and often visits Lady Jane at the London house.

Amelia uses her money to support the Sedley household and to buy clothing, books, and other items for Georgy. He is now attending school, and Amelia still lives for him. Meanwhile, Jane Osborne can’t stop thinking about Georgy and finally tells her father she saw him. One day Mr. Osborne meets Georgy while the boy is visiting Dobbin’s sisters. A few days later, Amelia receives an offer: Mr. Osborne will give Amelia an allowance and make Georgy his heir. In return, Georgy will live with him and occasionally see his mother. Amelia flares up in anger. She doesn’t tell her parents, who have fallen behind on their bills because of Mr. Sedley’s poor investments and Jos’s negligence in sending money. When Amelia tells her parents she plans to give less to the household to buy Georgy a new suit for Christmas, the truth comes out. Amelia sells her nice scarf and spends the money on Georgy. When she returns home with the gifts, her mother accuses her of being selfish and ruining Georgy by spoiling him. Amelia gives all her money to her mother. She realizes that she is holding Georgy back from having money, social status, and education by keeping him from the Osbornes.

On the second trip that Becky, Rawdon, and Rawdy take to Queen’s Crawley, Rawdy threatens Becky’s schemes when he reveals some of the true circumstances of his life at home. The close friendship between Becky and Lady Jane dissolves. Becky looks down on her sister-in-law for her kindness and goodness. To Becky, Lady Jane is now too simple and guileless. Instead, Becky is hard at work ingratiating herself with the new Sir Pitt Crawley, just as she did with his father. Understanding that Pitt wants to redeem the Crawley name after his father’s debauchery, Becky gives him support and advice in his political career, which is something either his wife can’t provide or he doesn’t give her the chance to provide. Ten years after first meeting Becky, Pitt, who has always been a serious man, is now attracted to this woman who is his complete opposite. While Pitt was drawn to Lady Jane because she is a true gentlewoman, he grows dissatisfied with her limitations once Becky directs her charms at him. The situation is ironic because had Lady Jane been more like Becky, Pitt certainly would never have married her.

An affair between Becky and Lord Steyne, first hinted at in Chapter XXXVII when she talked of needing a protector and a chaperone to guard her reputation, is played up again in Chapter XLIV. It is important to note that in Thackeray’s time, he would not have been able to address a sexual affair directly. The scene in which Becky accuses Rawdy of spying on her and hits him implies that she and Lord Steyne have a relationship that has progressed beyond mere risqué repartee. If Becky and Lord Steyne were only exchanging words, the young boy would have no understanding of what he was hearing, but if they were acting in an untoward fashion, he could see that something is amiss with his mother. That is why she strikes him. The servants also believe that Becky and Lord Steyne are having an affair. As they have access to the entire household, their thoughts contribute even more evidence, though circumstantial, as to the nature of the relationship.

Chapter XLIV focuses on Amelia and the struggles of the Sedley household. Her parents have long experienced financial difficulty, but now the issue comes to a head as they face bankruptcy. Just as when Amelia paid little attention to Mr. Sedley’s losing his business years ago because she could think only about George, she is now so lost in her all-consuming love for her son that she notices none of the economizing going on in the household. Mrs. Sedley finally loses her temper with Amelia’s self-centeredness. When she calls out her daughter for caring only about Georgy, she echoes the thoughts and frustration of many readers who have seen Amelia turn a blind eye to people who are truly worthy of her love, like Dobbin, in favor of those who are not. Amelia’s excessive and unhealthy love for Georgy has led him to become just like his father—in other words, selfish and spoiled. However, it seems unlikely that he will change, especially once he goes to live with his grandfather. Amelia seems wholly at fault for what Georgy has become.

