Howard Roark opens his own office. As soon as he signs
					his contract with Austen Heller, Roark goes to see Henry Cameron.
					Cameron feels vindicated when he sees a snapshot of Roark’s office.
					The first visitor to Roark’s new office is Peter Keating, who loudly praises
					Roark for his courage and inwardly resents Roark. One day, Roark
					sees his old friend Mike, the electrician, at work on the Heller job
					site. It surprises Roark that Mike is working on such a small project,
					but Mike says he would never miss Roark’s first building. Roark
					constantly visits the building site, as does Austen Heller, and the
					two become close friends. When the Heller house is completed, it
					receives little notice.

Alvah Scarret, the editor-in-chief of the Banner, assigns
					Dominique Francon to investigate living conditions in the New York slums.
					Dominique lives in a tenement for two weeks and writes a brilliant
					article. Back in affluent environs, she insults wealthy landowners
					by describing the brutal conditions of the tenements they own. She
					also shocks a group of social workers by describing the laziness
					and greed of the tenement people she encountered. Alvah is baffled
					by Dominique’s disregard for propriety and her fiercely neutral
					nature. Keating tries and fails to see Dominique again. Francon
					arranges for them to meet, and they converse pleasantly. Although
					he fears Dominique, Keating starts falling in love with her and
					sees her often. Late one night, a frightened Katie comes to see
					Keating. She has suddenly become terrified of her uncle Toohey,
					with whom she shares a home. Katie asks Peter to marry her the next
					day. Keating agrees, but as soon as Katie leaves, Mrs. Keating starts
					scolding and manipulating Keating, arguing that he should marry
					Dominique and solidify his place at Francon’s firm. Keating finally
					agrees to put off his marriage and tells Katie of his decision the
					following morning. Katie loyally accepts his decision, but after
					their conversation they both have a strange feeling that they have
					missed an important chance that will not come again.

A young entrepreneur who admires Heller’s house hires
					Roark to design a gas station. Every subsequent customer who approaches Roark
					wants things done in some past style, but Roark patiently explains
					that he only builds according to his beliefs. He believes that the
					building’s context should determine its form. Roark receives a commission
					from Whitford Sanborn, a former customer of Henry Cameron’s who
					wants a new country home. Sanborn originally wanted Cameron to design
					the house, but the retired Cameron recommended Roark. Although Roark’s
					preliminary sketches please Sanborn, his wife raises objections.
					Whitford Sanborn tries to compromise with Roark, but Roark refuses.
					Roark ultimately designs the house the way he wants, but Mrs. Sanborn
					refuses to live in it.

Both Roark and Keating face a number of crucial career
					choices in these and subsequent chapters. Rand uses such choices
					or trials to fine-tune her characters and reveal their true nature.
					Rand does not stop at stating that Roark is a determined, independent
					individual. She illustrates and proves his strength step-by-step
					by showing us how he interacts with his circumstances. When Roark
					must decide between compromising the design of Whitford Sanborn’s
					country home and losing the commission, he courageously opts to
					preserve the integrity of his work. Similarly Roark never asks his
					friends to do anything for him. Mike respects Roark enough to work
					for him without being asked and Cameron recommends Roark to his
					clients blindly. All of Roark’s clients approach him because they
					recognize the beauty of his work. Their interest is a response to
					his creative capacity, not to social connections or popular influence.
					Roark knows immediately the kind of men that will hire him: hardworking,
					uncompromising men who treasure their lives and business. Through
					all the ups and downs, Roark remains constant, focused and calm.
					At no point does he regret his actions or fear failure.

Keating, on the other hand, is motivated by a desperate
					need for approval. He wants Francon, Dominique, and his mother to
					think well of him and frequently plans his actions around their
					opinions. In Chapter 12, Keating abandons
					Katie in an effort to please his mother. Weak as he is himself,
					Keating cannot save the weak young Katie from her powerful uncle.
					We now see that Keating is not just spiteful and bumbling but also
					hurtful. His weakness leads to heartbreak. In contrast, Roark cares
					nothing for the opinions of others. Roark does not mind that others
					ignore his design of the Heller house. His insistence on doing his
					own work for Heller has already cost him his job at the Snyte firm,
					and now his own work goes unnoticed, but to Roark the loss of a
					job and the lack of recognition mean nothing. He cares only for
					the purity of the work. 

	Like Roark, Dominique speaks her mind with no regard
					for the opinion of her audience. After writing her report on the
					slums, her uncompromising attitude and refusal to identify herself
					with one camp or another parallels Roark’s self-possessed withdrawal
					from society. Dominique presents her view of the tenement situation
					as matter-of-factly as Roark shows customers his sketches, even though
					her frankness means that she offends both the landlords and the
					social workers. She could please the landlords by telling them what
					she tells the social workers, and vice versa, but it amuses her
					to annoy people with unpleasant truths. 

	Katie’s sudden fear of Toohey may seem at first to be
					tangential to the concerns of this section, for the important outcome
					of her fear is the revelation of Keating’s heartlessness. Her fear
					is not irrelevant, however, but an expression of Rand’s carefully
					designed plot, in which every detail has a purpose and each small
					incident points to future events. Katie’s sudden panic about her
					uncle points to events that unfold only much later in the novel.
					Rand uses this kind of foreshadowing to ensure that we immediately
					understand the consequences of cowardly and selfless behavior. She
					wants us to understand that bad things will happen because Keating
					the coward refuses to heed Katie’s cry for help, and because Katie
					the selfless goes along with Keating’s decision not to marry her
					right away. Even though punishment does not always happen immediately,
					Rand drops dark hints that it will come eventually.

