Newspaper magnate Gail Wynand is contemplating a new real estate
					venture called Stoneridge. Toohey recommends Keating as the architect
					for Stoneridge. When Wynand is skeptical, Toohey tells Wynand he
					should meet Dominique Keating before deciding. Toohey also tells
					Wynand he has a present that will convince Wynand. Later that evening,
					Wynand digs into his past to find a memory that will convince him
					to live.

	Wynand grew up in the gang-infested Hell’s Kitchen section
					of Manhattan. He had no use for the neighborhood schools and began working
					as a boy at a local paper called the Gazette. When
					the Gazette tried to frame an honest man, Wynand
					turned to one of his journalistic idols for help. When his idol
					refused to help, Wynand began to feel contempt for men of integrity.
					A few years later, Wynand seized control of a local paper from a
					political gang. He renamed the paper the Banner.
					In its first big campaign, the paper tried to solicit money from
					its readers on behalf of two people: a brilliant young scientist
					and the pregnant girlfriend of an executed murderer. The donations
					for the pregnant girl overwhelmed the donations for the scientist,
					which indicated to Wynand what the paper should cover if he wanted
					it to be popular. At the age of thirty-five, Wynand owned papers
					across the United States. 

	Wynand now keeps a secret art gallery filled with masterpieces. After
					his meeting with Toohey, Wynand finds a large crate waiting for
					him. He opens it and finds Mallory’s statue of Dominique inside. Wynand
					calls Toohey and agrees to meet Dominique.

One evening, Keating and Dominique talk. Keating
					observes that there is no real Dominique anymore and wonders aloud
					what has hap-pened to her soul. Dominique replies by asking about
					Keating’s soul, observing that Keating himself has no opinions of
					his own. Keating is about to agree when a phone call from Toohey
					interrupts him. Toohey says Wynand wishes to meet with Dominique
					to discuss Stoneridge.

When they meet, Dominique and Wynand connect instantly.
					Dominique, who is just as beautiful as her statue, impresses Wynand.
					She offers to sleep with Wynand if he will give the Stoneridge contract
					to Keating, but Wynand correctly guesses that Dominique only makes this
					offer because the thought of sleeping with him repulses her. Wynand’s
					insight surprises Dominique. Later, Wynand meets Keating and Dominique
					at an elegant restaurant. Wynand tells Keating that he will give
					him Stoneridge in exchange for Dominique. A week later, Wynand takes
					Dominique to see his art collection.

Wynand and Dominique go for a long cruise on Wynand’s
					yacht, the I Do. Wynand tells Dominique that when
					he was a child people had always told him he didn’t run things,
					and the yacht’s name is meant to contradict those people. The cruise
					is peaceful and comfortable. Wynand tells Dominique he is in love
					with her and asks her to marry him. His proposal shocks Dominique.
					She begins to question all of her assumptions about Wynand. When
					Dominique remembers the Stoddard Temple and the Banner’s
					campaign against Roark, she agrees to marry Wynand.

Wynand is the only character in The Fountainhead who
					does not fit neatly into a category, and the only truly tragic one
					as well. Wynand resembles Roark; both men are self-made, dynamic,
					and gifted. Unlike Roark, however, he became disillusioned after
					his early idols turned out to be shams. Like Toohey, Wynand sells
					himself to the public for power and devotes his life to proving
					his conviction that no one with true integrity actually exists.
					Wynand thus belongs to both Roark and Toohey’s world, and Dominique
					has a mixed reaction to Wynand because of his dual nature. Wynand’s
					contempt for beauty repels Dominique, but his strength attracts
					her. Wynand’s secret art gallery suggests the tragedy of a split
					identity. The art gallery is Wynand’s prosthetic spirit, a substitute
					for the private soul he gave up during his rise to power. The beauty
					of the works in the gallery inspires and nourishes Wynand, but also
					pains him. He knows that he will never put his love for beauty over
					his shallow public self.

	Rand times Wynand’s entrance into the narrative to maximize his
					importance to the novel’s characters and events. We feel Wynand’s
					power and influence from the beginning, but until now the man himself
					has not appeared. When Wynand finally enters the story, we are as
					surprised as Dominique to find that this shadowy figure possesses
					some of the virtues The Fountainhead idealizes.
					The story of Wynand’s lost idealism suggests that an encounter with Roark
					will stir up old feelings in Wynand, especially because we see Roark’s
					sway over other strong figures. Upon meeting Roark, the sculptor
					Mallory, for example, changes his mind and decides that incorruptible
					men do exist. Similarly, Dominique’s meeting with Roark causes her
					to reevaluate her worldview. This evidence of Roark’s power makes
					us anticipate an explosive first encounter between Roark and Wynand. 

	Keating’s fireside conversation with Dominique
					in Chapter 2 demonstrates his ability to
					think honestly and purely. At times, Keating is able to understand
					that a void is inside him, although he never finds the strength
					to fill that void. Keating sees Roark’s existence as an insult to his
					world and its standards, but he also understands Roark’s greatness. Keating
					has always hated Roark, but this hatred is just a redirected contempt
					for Keating’s own weakness. Although Keating does not redeem his
					flaws, his knowledge of his crimes and his grudging admiration of Roark
					make him less despicable than many of his colleagues, who remain
					happily ignorant of their shortcomings. Keating becomes a pitiable
					figure, completely overmastered by Dominique. Although Keating provokes
					our contempt, it seems that Dominique treats him with more cruelty
					than he deserves. 

