[S]he wrote on a sheet of blank paper
						. . . “The cops are here.”

Marius spends several months trying to track down Cosette,
					whom he only knows as his beloved Ursula, the young woman from the Luxembourg
					Gardens, but she has disappeared, and he has grown despondent. Marius
					cannot stop thinking of her until a visit from his neighbor, Eponine
					Jondrette, reminds him that other people’s troubles are worse than
					his own. Eponine comes to Marius’s room in the Gorbeau House to
					ask for money. She is so emaciated that she has the body of girl
					but the broken voice of an old man. To show off the fact that she
					is literate, Eponine writes “The cops are here” on a piece of paper.
					Marius fails to realize that Eponine is attracted to him and offers
					her his last five francs.

Marius decides to take a more active interest in the welfare
					of the Jondrettes. He finds a crack in the wall that separates their
					apartments and is horrified by the sight of the squalor and poverty
					in which they live. Through the crack, Marius sees Eponine enter
					with a philanthropist and a young girl. He immediately recognizes
					the philanthropist as Leblanc and the girl as Ursula. Jondrette
					pretends to be an unemployed actor and begs Leblanc for rent money. Though
					the amount Jondrette is asking for is much higher than the rent,
					Leblanc vows to return later that evening to give him the money.

Marius overhears Jondrette plotting to rob and kill Leblanc when
					he returns that evening. Clearly, Jondrette and his wife recognize
					both Leblanc and Ursula from some past incident, and they seem infuriated
					to see their old acquaintances so well off. With the help of Patron-Minette,
					the local mob, the Jondrettes form a plan to coerce Leblanc into
					giving them a large sum of money. Although Marius does not fully
					understand the connection between the Jondrettes and Leblanc, he
					runs to the local police station. He tells an inspector about Jondrette’s
					plan. The inspector, who turns out to be Javert, gives Marius two
					pistols and tells him to return to the Gorbeau House. Javert tells
					Marius that when the robbery has reached its peak, he should fire
					one of the pistols to signal to the police to enter the building
					and arrest the thieves.

Marius returns to his apartment. When Leblanc returns
					to the Gorbeau House, Jondrette and a number of local hoods—among them
					the members of Patron-Minette—ambush him. Leblanc calmly refuses
					to sign over any of his money, saying that he has none. Jondrette
					angrily reveals that his real name is Thénardier. Leblanc denies
					that he has ever met Thénardier before. Marius, recognizing the
					name Thénardier from his father’s note, is faced with the dilemma
					of whether to help Leblanc or to protect the man who saved his father’s
					life.

The Thénardiers force Valjean to write a note summoning Cosette
					to the apartment. Thénardier’s messengers return with the news that
					Valjean has given them a false name and address. Thénardier is on
					the verge of killing Valjean when Marius sends Eponine’s scribbled
					message—“The cops are here“—flying through the window. When the
					criminals read that the police have arrived, they try to flee, but
					Javert makes his entrance and arrests them all. In the confusion,
					Valjean slips out the window.

Thénardier’s attempt to rob Leblanc is the climax of the
					“Marius” section of the novel, and it pulls together all the loose
					threads and unexplained coincidences that have occurred in the previous
					chapters. The episode shows Hugo’s remarkable ability to use the
					smallest details from the past to make the most far-fetched parts
					of his story plausible. The incident is based on an extraordinary
					series of coincidences: Both Marius and the Thénardiers move into
					the same building where Valjean once lived; Thénardier happens to
					ask for money from Valjean, who is the father of Marius’s beloved;
					the inspector for the precinct happens to be Javert; and Thénardier turns
					out to be the man who Marius’s father thought saved his life at Waterloo.
					Although the overlap of so many different story lines is improbable,
					it is not inconceivable. For example, it makes sense that Marius
					and Thénardier might be neighbors, since Thénardier would appreciate
					the anonymity of the Gorbeau House and Marius would appreciate its
					low rent. Similarly, it is not surprising that the dogged Javert
					is still working in the last precinct where he knows Valjean lived.
					Lesser details also have a plausible explanation. Eponine has likely
					scribbled many warning notes in her criminal career, so writing
					“The cops are here” to prove her literacy is a logical choice for her.
					Thus, though the episode involves an unlikely combination of coincidences,
					Hugo roots the robbery so thoroughly in his earlier chapters that
					we can believe it.

The robbery scene forces Marius to choose between his
					different allegiances. While the climax does not resolve all of
					these conflicts, it does give us insight into Marius’s character,
					especially his ability to find a middle ground. Marius does not,
					for instance, fire the pistol at the appointed moment since he does
					not want to betray his father’s dying wish that he assist Thénardier
					in any way possible, but he does throw Eponine’s letter into the
					Thénardiers’ apartment. This split-second decision indicates Marius’s
					newfound ability to balance his various allegiances while staying
					true to his own beliefs. While Marius does not betray Thénardier,
					he does prevent him from harming Valjean, whom Marius wishes to
					protect due to his love for Cosette. While Valjean and Javert are
					unyielding in their principles, Marius is more flexible and comes
					up with a way of thinking that is distinctly his own.

The Thénardiers’ intricate schemes against Valjean show
					how thoroughly jealousy drives their criminal behavior. Unable to
					feel love and compassion themselves, the Thénardiers retaliate by
					plotting against those who are capable of such emotions. Mme. Thénardier’s
					enraged reaction upon seeing that Cosette is better clothed than
					her own daughters represents her materialistic interpretation of
					the fact that Cosette is purer and more righteous than her children.
					Rather than try to learn how to become upstanding citizens themselves,
					the Thénardiers view respectability as an affront and try to drag
					Valjean and Cosette down to their own debased level of existence.
					The only members of the Thénardiers who do not suffer from these
					jealous urges are Gavroche, who no longer lives in the Thénardier
					household, and Eponine. Eponine’s visit to Marius at the beginning
					of Book Eight foreshadows the selflessness she displays later in
					the novel.

