Vronsky continues life as usual in his regiment. Though
					he never lets slip that he loves Anna, the whole of St. Petersburg
					high society knows about his feelings for her. The women who once
					praised Anna as righteous now wait for a chance to sling mud in
					her face.

Vronsky hears about an upcoming officers’ steeplechase,
					so he buys a new mare, named Frou-Frou, to ride in one of the races.
					On the day of the races, Vronsky visits Frou-Frou in the stable,
					and she grows more agitated as he approaches. Vronsky reflects on
					everyone pestering him about Anna.

Just before the horse race, Vronsky visits Anna at her
					nearby summer house. She has been thinking about him and seems somewhat
					distraught. Her son, Seryozha, is absent, as Vronsky had hoped.
					Anna informs Vronsky that she is pregnant. He urges her to leave
					her husband and live with him instead. Vronsky cannot imagine how
					Anna can wish to continue living in such deceit, not realizing that
					the reason is her love for her son. Suddenly, Vronsky realizes he
					is late for the races.

Vronsky arrives at the racetrack just as Frou-Frou is
					being led out of the stable. Vronsky’s brother, Alexander, approaches
					him and tells him to answer a letter their mother has recently sent.
					Vronsky is expected to do well in the race, as his only serious
					rival is another officer, Makhotin, who rides a horse named Gladiator.
					Nonetheless, Vronsky is agitated. The race begins. After a slow
					start, Frou-Frou outpaces all the horses except Gladiator. At last,
					Frou-Frou pulls ahead of Gladiator, and is in the lead. Vronsky
					is ecstatic. But during a jump over a ditch, he shifts in the saddle
					incorrectly, causing Frou-Frou to fall. The horse breaks her back
					and must be shot.

Meanwhile, the Karenins’ relationship, on the surface,
					has remains just the same as before. Unable to face or admit his
					own feelings for his wife, Karenin treats Anna with an offended
					hostility. He hardly ever sees her, as she goes away for the summer,
					living near Betsy Tverskoy’s home in the countryside. At the officers’
					steeplechase, which Anna and Betsy attend together, Karenin observes
					that his wife only has eyes for Vronsky. When Vronsky falls, Anna
					weeps with alarm, and then with relief after hearing that he is
					safe. Karenin offers to take Anna home, but she prefers to stay.
					Karenin tells Anna that her visible grief upon Vronsky’s fall is
					highly improper. Finally, on the carriage ride home, Anna frankly
					confesses to Karenin that she loves Vronsky and hates Karenin. The
					shocked Karenin demands that she continue to observe the outward
					conventions of marriage for appearances’ sake until a suitable solution
					is found.

Meanwhile, Kitty and some of her family are at a spa in
					Germany. The Shcherbatskys enjoy socializing with European aristocrats
					as they await an improvement in Kitty’s health. One of the spa guests
					is a snobby, elderly, Russian invalid named Madame Stahl, who is
					famously devout and is accompanied by a young girl named Varenka.
					Kitty likes Varenka immensely but is nervous about meeting her.
					Kitty’s mother learns that two spa guests, a tattered Russian gentleman
					and his female companion, are in fact Levin’s brother Nikolai and
					Nikolai’s girlfriend. One day, Kitty’s mother is so impressed with
					Varenka that she allows Kitty to meet the girl. Kitty is delighted,
					and both mother and daughter are enchanted by Varenka’s goodness.

Following Varenka’s example of charity, Kitty throws herself into
					devotion and good deeds. She befriends a sad painter named Petrov,
					visiting him often. However, Petrov’s wife eventually becomes jealous
					of Kitty, who is upset that her good intentions have gone astray.
					Near the end of Kitty’s treatment, her father, Prince Shcherbatsky,
					returns from his travels elsewhere in Germany. He entertains his
					family and various others at the spa with his easy manner and funny
					jokes. The Prince chats with Madame Stahl, who he claims is bedridden
					not from illness but from vanity, merely because her legs are stubby.
					Her idealized, pious image of Madame Stahl deflated, Kitty never
					sees the old woman in the same way again.

One of Tolstoy’s main concerns in Anna Karenina is
					the conflict between inner and outer life, between private passions
					and the public social conventions that bind those passions. We see
					this tension in Karenin’s reaction to the news of Anna’s adultery.
					Unlike Anna, Karenin has no expectation that outward appearances
					should match the heart’s inner feelings—he is content to live with
					a glaring disparity between the two. He tells Anna that she must
					maintain the status quo until he finds a suitable solution, which
					effectively means living the same life of deceit and lies with which
					Anna has struggled prior to her confession. Karenin’s position ensures
					that Anna’s admission of adultery changes nothing. Nothing changes
					later, either, when Karenin insists on formally maintaining his
					marriage. Although Anna has done wrong, she at least is aligned
					with the side of truth. In contrast, Karenin, who technically has
					done no wrong, is guilty in the sense that he prefers falsity just
					for the sake of maintaining appearances.

Vronsky’s disaster in the horse race is a brilliant symbol
					of the difficulties he faces as Anna’s lover. Tolstoy fills the
					scene with implicit comparisons between the horses’ obstacle course
					and the love affair. Vronsky is on public display as he rides in
					the officers’ steeplechase, just as his love affair with Anna is
					on public display despite all his efforts to keep it secret. He
					struggles to control Frou-Frou, a creature he does not know well,
					just as he struggles to understand the still-unfamiliar intricacies
					of his relationship with Anna. Moreover, much like a romantic relationship,
					Vronsky’s relationship with his horse is more of a partnership than
					a situation of mastery and submission. He cannot rule the horse
					completely but can only hope for the best. Frou-Frou and Vronsky
					seem to have a strong rapport, but the horse grows increasingly
					nervous as Vronsky approaches her just before the race—just as the
					relationship between Vronsky and Anna becomes more unsettled as
					the lovers grow closer. Vronsky’s troubling conversations with Anna
					and his brother before the race impair his concentration and his
					ability to ride, emphasizing still further the connection between
					his horse race and his relationship. In light of these parallels,
					the race is darkly prophetic. Vronsky’s false move on the saddle,
					which inadvertently breaks Frou-Frou’s back and leads to her death,
					foreshadows Vronsky’s unintentional yet disastrous wounding of Anna.

Kitty’s involvement with Varenka and Madame Stahl demonstrates
					Tolstoy’s ability to approach the central themes and concerns of Anna
						Karenina from various angles, so subtly that we are hardly conscious
					of it. Kitty’s stay at the German spa offers a parallel tale of a
					character swept away by illusions and then rudely awakened to disillusionment.
					Tolstoy presents Kitty’s disenchantment with Madame Stahl in a way
					that makes us think twice about Anna’s infatuation with Vronsky.
					When Kitty becomes enamored with Varenka and Madame Stahl, she is
					gloriously happy to have found a higher aim for her life, a transcendent
					vision of charity and piety to lift her up. But as Kitty’s father
					points out to her later, Madame Stahl is less an invalid angel of
					virtue and goodness than a vain woman who stays in bed because her
					legs are stubby. In imitating Madame Stahl, Kitty performs acts
					of goodness that are not sincere, as she herself admits eventually.
					Indeed, Kitty causes more harm than good when she makes Petrov’s
					wife jealous and upset. In presenting this sequence of infatuation
					and disillusionment, Tolstoy implies that Anna may be in love with
					an illusion as well, causing unnecessary harm to those around her.
					We see what Anna may not yet see: Vronsky is not a Prince Charming
					but rather an ordinary man with the same limitations as everyone
					else, including Anna’s own husband.

