In his introduction, Bunyan addresses his second book,
					known as Part II of The Pilgrim’s Progress. He
					orders the book to follow in the footsteps of Part I, embarking
					on a pilgrimage of its own. Bunyan calls the book by the name of
					Christiana and, thereby identifying it with Christian’s wife, Christiana.

Bunyan then imagines Christiana offering him several objections to
					the proposed pilgrimage. First, she disagrees that some may not believe
					that she is truly authored by the original writer of Christian’s tale.
					The author replies that Christiana needs only send for him, and he
					will arrive to claim her as his own creation. Second, Christiana says
					that some readers might react angrily to the book. Here Bunyan answers
					that she should not fear this, since the first book has so many
					readers across Europe and America. Third, Christiana objects that
					certain people might dislike the use of allegory. Bunyan defends using
					fiction to tell what he considers to be religious truths. Finally, Christiana
					asks about those readers who call Bunyan’s work mere romance, a
					style of heroic prose and verse narrative. Bunyan says that not
					everyone can be pleased but reminds Christiana of the long list
					of vibrant characters the book contains and reassures her that readers
					will love her.

The narrator recounts his follow-up dream about Christian’s wife
					and children left behind in the City of Destruction. This time he dreams
					of an elderly man named Sagacity, who visits to talk about the City
					of Destruction, and asks whether Sagacity has heard of Christian.
					Sagacity says that he has and that Christian resides now in the
					Celestial City. The narrator also asks Sagacity about Christian’s
					wife, Christiana, and their four sons. Sagacity answers that he knows
					they packed up and embarked on a journey to find Christian and be
					reunited. Sagacity now acts as a narrator and offers to tell the story
					of Christiana’s pilgrimage.

At the beginning of Sagacity’s tale, Christiana invites
					a fellow townsperson named Mercy to accompany her on the pilgrimage. She
					offers to hire Mercy as her servant but says that they will share all
					their possessions on the trip as equals. Mercy agrees, and Christiana
					is joyful, not only at having a caretaker for her four children on
					the journey but also at having urged another human toward salvation.
					Mercy feels pity for those whom she will leave behind. Christiana
					says that pity befits a pilgrim and that one day those left behind
					may choose to follow her.

Christiana, Mercy, and the children cross the Slough of
					Despond. They slip several times but do not fall in. At this point,
					the narrator says that Sagacity ends his tale, and the narrator
					himself falls asleep and follows Christiana’s progress in a dream.
					Christiana’s group comes upon the gate to the path that will lead
					them the rest of the way to the Celestial City. A frightening dog
					barks at them. A gatekeeper appears and demands to know who they
					are. Christiana says she is Christian’s wife, and the gatekeeper
					expresses admiration for him. He opens the gate and lets in Christiana
					and her children, but Mercy remains outside the gate. Terrified,
					she remembers a passage from the Gospel of Matthew in which two
					women are said to grind at a mill. According to the passage, only
					one is saved while the other is turned away. Mercy assumes she will
					be turned away but knocks on the door anyway. The gatekeeper demands
					to know who she is. Christiana explains. Mercy nearly faints from
					fear but is allowed in.

After passing through the gate, Christiana and Mercy express relief
					at having been admitted. Christiana remarks how odd it is that such
					an ugly and frightening dog should reside with the gatekeeper and
					asks the gatekeeper to explain. He says that the dog belongs to a
					neighbor and actually performs a useful service by barking so ferociously,
					scaring off beggars. By contrast, earnest pilgrims stand up to the
					dog. The gatekeeper feeds Christiana and her group and washes their
					feet.

By calling Part II “Christiana,” Bunyan addresses the
					book as if it were a living being. He shows the book fretting with
					self-doubts that he must soothe. When he encourages the book Christiana
					to follow in the footsteps of Part I, he tells her to trust her
					own literary self-worth.

The major difference between the journeys in Parts I and
					II is that Part II portrays a female point of view. Aside from the
					old man Sagacity who introduces the tale, the main characters are
					two women, Christiana and Mercy. Part II shows how a women’s pilgrimage
					will be different in important ways from the man’s pilgrimage in
					Part I. Bunyan introduces elements into Part II that were absent
					from the male-dominated Part I. Christiana and Mercy are two women
					who have concerns that would have been stereotypically feminine
					in the seventeenth century. Since a woman could not be expected
					to travel safely alone, Christiana must hire Mercy as a servant.
					This introduces a complication, since pilgrims’ theoretical equality
					before God seems contradicted by one working for another. Christiana
					aims at equality by promising to share everything on the trip, but
					the complication remains when she hires Mercy. Furthermore, a mother
					cannot be expected to leave her children behind, even though the
					father did so earlier. Since the children must come along, childrearing
					will necessarily be a part of this pilgrimage. Boss-employee relations
					and family relations thus already figure more largely in Part II
					than in Part I.

The Bible figures as importantly in Christiana’s story
					as it did in Christian’s. As in Part I, characters in Part II appear
					familiar with biblical passages and quote them easily. Even the
					servant, Mercy, knows the Bible. She is the first one who makes
					a reference to the holy book in when she reaches the gate to the
					Celestial City. But interestingly, the Bible makes her afraid, as
					it never did Christian. When she is trembling at the gate leading
					to the Celestial City, she fearfully recalls a passage from Matthew
					that refers to two women, one of whom is turned away from a desired
					path. She assumes she will be turned away too, since Christiana
					has already entered the gate. Christian quoted the Bible confidently
					as a source of truth. When Mercy quotes the Bible, she applies it
					wrongly. Thus she faces the possibility of misunderstanding the
					holy word.

Bunyan emphasizes personal bonds in Part II. In Part I,
					Christian almost always had a companion, but his companions changed often:
					Pliable went home, Faithful was killed, and only Hopeful made it
					to the Celestial City with him. Christian shows only slight distress
					when he loses a travel companion and does not stop to fret about
					traveling alone. He is more concerned with his progress toward the
					Celestial City and does not want to be detoured from his journey.
					In contrast, camaraderie seems necessary with Christiana and Mercy
					in Part II. When it appears that Mercy might be shut out of the
					gatekeeper’s gate, Christiana steps in to lobby on Mercy’s behalf.
					Her bold resolution to help Mercy may be partly selfish since Christiana
					needs a servant on her trip. But she values her comrade more urgently
					than Christian seemed to value any of his.

The episode of the barking dog suggests how much Bunyan’s style
					has evolved in the direction of realism, away from pure allegory.
					The dangers in Part I were vivid and often terrifying but usually
					fairy-tale-like, such as the frightening Giant Despair in his prison-like
					castle. However, the dangers that arise in Part II are portrayed
					differently than in Part I. One instance is the barking dog at the
					gate leading to the Celestial City. The barking dog is a common danger.
					This is an aspect of the everyday life and it is easy to understand
					why Christiana and Mercy are afraid. As a result, Christiana and
					Mercy in the dog episode appear more like characters in a novel than
					Christian did.

