In the morning, Dorothy and the Scarecrow notice a man made of tin who has been rusted in place for a year. After Dorothy rescues him by oiling his joints, the Tin Woodman asks to join the trip to the Emerald City, hoping the Great Oz will give him a heart. As they continue walking, the Tin Woodman clears trees and branches that block their path, and he and the Scarecrow discuss whether it’s better to have a brain or a heart. Having had both, the Tin Woodman believes a heart is more important. He then tells the story of how he transformed from a real man into a tin man. 

The Tin Woodman explains that the Wicked Witch of the East bewitched his axe to keep him from marrying the Munchkin girl he loved. The axe cut off parts of his body, which he had replaced with tin. After losing his heart in one of these accidents, the Tin Woodman stopped caring about the girl. He believes the heart, not the brain, makes one happy. However, the Scarecrow insists that one needs a brain to guide one’s heart to not be a fool.

Dorothy, Toto, the Scarecrow, and the Tin Woodman continue through the forest. Suddenly, a lion jumps out at them, knocking over the Scarecrow, swiping at the Tin Woodman, and threatening Toto. Upset, Dorothy slaps the Lion’s nose and scolds him for being a coward, to which the Lion admits he is. The Cowardly Lion talks about the difference between the scary way he acts and the scared way he feels. The Scarecrow thinks such reflection demonstrates that the Lion has a heart. However, the Lion believes if he had no heart, he would be braver. Hearing about the trip to the Emerald City, the Cowardly Lion decides to join the others so he can ask the Great Oz for courage and be happier. Along the way, Toto and the Cowardly Lion become friends. Meanwhile, not wanting to hurt any living creature, the Tin Woodman tries to avoid stepping on bugs. The Tin Woodman believes because he doesn’t have a heart to guide him, he needs to be especially careful in his kindness.

Dorothy’s role as protagonist is fully established in this section as she meets two new companions and learns more about the antagonism of the Wicked Witch of the East. The Tin Woodman explains the evil spell the Witch put on him, and Dorothy shows leadership and courage by agreeing to help the Tin Woodman and then standing up to the Lion when he mistakenly attacks the group. Each character who joins Dorothy’s quest to find the Wizard of Oz has their own mission, but Dorothy is clearly their leader, and her quest to return home remains at the heart of the story. 

The actions of the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman introduce the idea that they already possess what they are searching and longing for. Although the Woodman desperately wants a heart so that he can feel kindness, he cries when he accidentally steps on a bug. Afterward he walks “very carefully, with his eyes on the road” so as not to harm any other small creatures. This tender cautiousness shows that he already has a heart. Likewise, when the Woodman’s jaw rusts up, the Scarecrow is the only member of the group to realize something is wrong; he already has the brain he is searching for. Likewise, Dorothy possesses the strength to lead without any help from this magical setting, demonstrated by her treatment of the Cowardly Lion. This idea of possessing what you search and long for will come up again with the Cowardly Lion, who wishes for courage but will nonetheless act courageously.

