Evening, Confederate camp just west of Gettysburg.
					Longstreet rides aimlessly on his horse and broods, examining the
					battlefield. He is anxious about the hills, because he recognizes
					the strategic importance of the high ground. Longstreet knows that Lee
					will attack the next day. Lee is “fixed and unturnable, a runaway
					horse,” and Longstreet believes that Lee is making a mistake.
					But Lee will not listen to Longstreet, and Lee’s reticence makes Longstreet
					depressed. Longstreet starts to think about his children, all three
					of them dead from fever over the winter, and he becomes even more
					depressed. He knows that the army is all that he has left.

	Fremantle, the British observer, fumbles his
					way next to Longstreet. Fremantle is giddy with pleasure at having
					seen the fighting earlier that day. He is impressed by the Southern
					people, since they often seem similar to the English. He says that
					Lee is an English general, and that Lee has gained a reputation
					in Europe—mostly because Americans are never thought of as gentlemen.
					Fremantle adds, “You cannot imagine the surprise. One hears all
					these stories of Indians and massacres and lean backwoodsmen with
					ten-foot rifles and rain dances and what not, and yet here, your
					officers. . . . Why, do you know, your General Lee is even a member
					of the Church of England?” Fremantle hopes that the English and
					the Confederacy can become allies. England, however, never enters
					the war against the Union because the Confederates support slavery,
					to which England is opposed.

	Fremantle and Longstreet also discuss “Stonewall”
					Jackson, Lee’s former right-hand general who was killed before the
					Battle of Gettysburg. Another Confederate officer, Dick Garnett,
					was shamed when Jackson accused him of cowardice in retreating from
					an impossible fight, and Jackson tried to have Garnett court-martialed.
					Garnett, who now serves under General Pickett, had no chance to
					clear his name before Jackson died, and now he is depressed because
					of his dishonored reputation. “Honor without intelligence . . .
					could lose the war,” Longstreet says, referring obliquely to Lee
					and his style of gentlemen’s warfare. Longstreet describes how he
					believes a new form of fighting should be introduced, one that takes
					advantage of new weapon technology such as repeating rifles. But
					Lee, Longstreet thinks, “would rather lose the war than his dignity.”

Lee meets with generals Ewell, Early, and Rodes. Lee wants
					to know why Ewell has not taken Cemetery Hill. Ewell claims that
					he did not think it possible. Early adds that there were rumors
					of Union forces to the north that had to be confirmed before they
					could make an attack, so they decided to wait for another general,
					Johnson, to arrive with his forces. Early adds that Cemetery Hill
					“will be a very strong position” for the Union forces.

	Annoyed, but ready to move on, Lee asks Ewell
					if he can attack the right (northern) flank of the Union army the
					next day. Early thinks it would be a difficult fight, but if Longstreet
					attacks the left flank, it might draw enough Union troops to the
					south to make an attack by Ewell and Early worthwhile. Lee mentions Longstreet’s
					suggestion that they move the army southeast and come between the
					Union army and Washington, D.C. Ewell thinks that to leave the town,
					which they have captured, would demoralize the troops, and Early
					thinks it unwise to move an entire army around the high, fortified
					position that the Union forces are holding. Privately, to himself,
					Lee agrees that it would be extremely difficult to move the army
					without Stuart and his cavalry to guide them.

	Lee leaves and meets General Isaac Trimble,
					who is furious with Ewell for not having taken Cemetery Hill. Trimble
					tells Lee that he offered to take the hill with no more than a regiment,
					but Ewell made no response: he simply froze. Lee retires to his
					headquarters in an old house and considers his options. Lee sends
					for Ewell. Ewell arrives, somewhat sheepish, and tells
					his commander that he and Early think they should attack the right flank,
					as Lee suggested. Ewell apologizes for being too “careful” that
					day, and Lee, a gentleman, accepts the apology and does not chide
					Ewell very much. Lee goes to sleep, wondering where Stuart is.

Shaara decides to focus his novel on the Confederacy’s
					view of the Battle of Gettysburg for several reasons. The battle
					is often referred to as the “high tide of the Confederacy,” because
					it was as close as the Confederate States of America ever came to achieving
					their independence. They had invaded Northern territory and were
					now attempting to destroy the Union army once and for all. Lee knows
					that if they successfully destroy the Union army, the war will be
					over. This desire to completely vanquish his opponents may be part
					of the reason why Lee is so intent on attacking the Union troops
					instead of moving to the defensive posture Longstreet continually
					suggests.

	In Chapter 5, Longstreet
					begins to take a central role in the novel. By focusing on his character,
					Shaara advances the idea, once very popular among historians, that
					Longstreet was a visionary tactician who understood the nature of
					modern warfare before there really was such a thing. In an extended
					discussion with Fremantle, Longstreet explains how a single man
					with a rifle can kill at least three men on a battlefield, on average,
					when in a defensive posture—behind a tree, or in a trench. This
					view of Longstreet is partially based on Longstreet’s own writings
					after the war, when it was very obvious that the Confederacy could have
					benefited from more defensive tactics. Shaara bases his characterization
					of Longstreet on a number of the man’s own writings, so all the
					discussion of futuristic tactics and Longstreet’s frustration at
					the backward or old-style strategies of Lee must be taken with a
					grain of salt. Longstreet became an advocate for defensive warfare
					after seeing it work well at Fredericksburg, but his enthusiasm
					was not necessarily based on a realization of the nature of modern
					warfare—he had seen defensive warfare work well, and so he thought
					it should be used more often.

