The Republic’s most wanted criminal and one of the story’s protagonists. Day is an agile, quick, and street-savvy fifteen-year-old. He is also devoted to his family, who live in the poor sector of Los Angeles. Although Day is a criminal, he goes out of his way to make sure he doesn’t maim or harm his victims unnecessarily. Even though Day is extremely intelligent and in control most of the time, he is subject to emotional outbursts that get him into trouble.

Read an in-depth analysis of Day.

The novel’s other protagonist. June is a hardworking, intelligent student who comes from a privileged wealthy family. She is rebellious, just like Day, but believes in the Republic and its values, since it has never caused her any problems, and she succeeds within its system. June values logic above emotion and can be a bit naive. Her inability to question her superiors makes her vulnerable to their manipulation.

Read an in-depth analysis of June.

A homeless orphan Day finds one day while they’re both scavenging the streets. She and Day become like family and rely on each other for companionship and care. Tess knowledgeably tends to Day’s wounds whenever he is hurt. She is trusting and trustworthy, and takes others, like June, in without question.   

June’s older brother. Metias is extremely protective of his sister and will do anything for her. Even though Metias is a high-ranking member of the Republic’s military, he realizes that the Republic poses some problems because of its overreaching authority. He balances respect, honor, and obedience with a healthy degree of skepticism. Above all, Metias wants his sister to be safe.

Read an in-depth analysis of Metias.

Metias’s friend and colleague in the Republic’s military and one of the novel’s antagonists. Thomas grew up poor and is grateful for his rise in position in society. Highly disciplined, he carries out orders without question. Thomas wants to protect his role in the military at all costs and never wants to return to poverty and his humble beginnings.

Read an in-depth analysis of Thomas.

The novel’s main antagonist. Commander Jameson is a cold, brutal, unsympathetic military leader. She especially dislikes it when people defy her authority or make her look foolish in front of others. Commander Jameson has no empathy for Day, Metias, June, or any other member of the Republic.

A member of the Patriots, a resistance group to the Republic. Kaede is fierce, and she has no problem breaking the rules. She is also not easily won over: She won’t put herself in unnecessary danger for an ideal or cause. She acts practically. 

Day’s older brother. John is patient and caring, just like their father. John is highly protective of his younger brothers, Day and Eden. Like Day, he is extremely loyal to his family and proves that he is capable of great self-sacrifice by the end of the novel. He just wants his family safe. 

The Republic’s official administrator of the Trial tests, and Metias’s first mentor. Chian has a scar across his face and has a hatred for Day and anyone else who betrays the Republic. Chian’s overly friendly behavior makes June uncomfortable.

Day’s younger brother. Eden is creative and likes to draw. He looks up to his brothers and is at their mercy when he falls sick.

The Dean Secretary at Drake. Arisna gets frustrated with June’s rebellious behavior at school.

One of the Republic’s resistance fighters and a spy. He refuses to betray the Patriots despite brutal torture by Commander Jameson. 

The Republic’s dictator. Elector Primo is regal, elegant, and demands allegiance.

Elector Primo’s son. He is beautiful, intelligent, and graceful. He hopes to take his father’s place one day.

