Anne writes that she is growing more bored in the annex
					and tires of listening to the same stories over and over again.
					The adults constantly repeat the stories they have heard from Mr.
					Kleiman, Jan, and Miep, which are mainly stories about other Jews
					who are in hiding. Anne is very impressed by the Dutch people who
					are helping Jews hide, since they are risking their own lives in
					an attempt to save others. She goes downstairs one night and feels
					that she cannot count on anyone else to support her. However, Anne’s
					fears vanish as she looks up into the sky and puts her faith in
					God. She has an intense desire to be alone, but she worries that
					someday she will be more alone than she would like.

	Anne’s personal life has changed considerably since the
					weekend, when she noticed Peter looking at her “not in the usual
					way.” The next day, Peter confides that he is often too nervous
					to speak to people and that he used to beat up people instead of
					talking to them. Anne is happy to learn that Peter is also temperamental.
					On Margot’s birthday, Anne and Peter talk again, and Peter says
					he is sure Britain will go to war against Russia. Peter also adds
					that he is sorry he was born a Jew. Anne is disappointed to find
					out that although Peter does not want to be Christian, he wants
					to make sure no one knows he is Jewish after the war. He says that
					the Jews are the chosen people, and Anne exclaims, “Just this once,
					I hope they’ll be chosen for something good!”

	Anne starts to enjoy going upstairs to see Peter, and
					she says her life is much better now that she has something to look
					forward to. However, she adds that she is not in love. All the same,
					Anne’s mother does not like the idea of her going upstairs. A few
					days later, Anne writes that she thinks about Peter all the time
					and that Peter van Daan and Peter Schiff have melted into one Peter.
					Anne’s newfound happiness is briefly shaken after another, more
					serious break-in at the office. It seems that the burglar has a
					duplicate key.

	Anne writes about love, saying that emotional love eventually leads
					to physical love, and that she considers this a natural progression
					and does not worry about losing her “virtue.” She imagines that
					her grandmother is watching over and protecting her. Mrs. van Daan
					teases Anne about Peter. In a particularly self-reflective entry, Anne
					thinks back on her life before coming to the annex. She says that
					her life was heavenly but that she was superficial and very different
					back then. Anne remarks that her carefree days as a schoolgirl are
					gone forever, but she does not miss them.

	Anne also looks back over her time in the annex and distinguishes
					different periods in her growing maturity. In 1942,
					she said that the transition from a life “filled with sunshine”
					to one of quarrels and accusations made her stubborn and insolent.
					In 1943 she was sad,
					lonely and self-critical but then became a teenager and was treated
					more like a grown-up. She gained a deeper insight into her family
					and the other members of the annex, and she began to feel more emotionally
					independent. Now, in 1944,
					she has begun to discover her longing “not for a girlfriend, but
					for a boyfriend,” and she has noticed a new depth to her emotions
					and sense of self. Anne also sadly notes that the police have arrested
					Mr. M., a man who had provided her family with food. The residents
					are scared anew when they hear a knock on the wall next door during
					dinner.

By this point in her diary, Anne has gained a fuller sense
					of self and a clearer view of her relationships with the people
					in the annex. She starts signing her diary “Anne M. Frank” instead
					of simply “Anne,” a sign that she perceives her own coming of age.
					Anne has matured significantly during her time in the annex, particularly
					because her family’s time in hiding coincided with Anne’s puberty.
					In this confined world, Anne has also developed her relationships
					with her family, because the close quarters have forced her to understand
					her parents and sister on a deeper level.

Confinement in the annex has changed Peter as well. He
					opens up to Anne emotionally, whereas he previously used physical
					force instead of connecting with other people. Anne finds in Peter
					the confidant for whom she had been longing. She becomes aware of
					her feelings for the opposite sex, a new aspect of maturity and
					development as a young woman that changes her entire experience
					of living in the annex.

	With life in the annex becoming more tedious and oppressive, Peter’s
					empathy and companionship provide Anne with significant emotional
					and mental relief. Since her physical life is so static and confined,
					Anne instead begins to look forward to emotional changes such as
					the development of her feelings for Peter. Because of the physical
					confinement of the annex, the evolution of Peter and Anne’s relationship
					is on display for everyone else to see. As Peter becomes an object
					of desire for Anne, the adults begin to comment on the appropriateness
					of the relationship, and Mrs. van Daan constantly teases Anne. The
					lack of privacy forces Anne to confront issues with her family and
					sexuality long before she would have under normal circumstances.

Anne’s growing maturity is also evident in the increased
					gravity of her discussions of her life and the war. For the first
					time, Anne writes seriously about the possibility of her own death,
					especially as her morale worsens. At the same time, she dreams about
					life after the war and about her great fortune in having a hiding
					place. She has become highly introspective and insightful about
					her own nature, and she begins to reflect on her past development
					and organize it into stages. Anne uses her diary like a literary
					timeline of her inner development, which she analyzes and critiques.
					By criticizing her own past actions and thoughts, she shows her
					capacity for personal growth and self-awareness, two important aspects
					of coming-of-age. Anne considers the possibility of her death, but
					she does not fully come to terms with the fact that the future may
					not come for her. Though maturing into a young woman, she still
					retains a measure of youthful innocence and idealism.

	Anne and Peter also confront their identity as young
					Jews, a subject that Anne rarely touches upon in her diary. Anne
					does not consider the possibility of converting to Christianity
					and is shocked when Peter says that in the future he will hide the
					fact that he is Jewish. Anne is proud that she is Jewish and remains
					optimistic that the Jews will eventually be rewarded for their faith
					and not persecuted. Peter, however, is ashamed that he is Jewish
					and wants to separate himself from his past. The discussion that
					the two share and their different conclusions represent two common
					but opposite reactions to the Holocaust: a strengthening of Jewish
					identification versus a willful weakening of an association with
					Judaism.

