Mariah, Lucy’s employer, represents both Lucy’s past and her present.
				Though Mariah, an affluent North American white woman, is very different from
				Lucy’s mother, Lucy comes to view her as a mother figure who to some extent
				embodies the best and worst of her mother. Like Lucy’s mother, Mariah tries to
				mold Lucy in her own image, imposing her views on everything from daffodils to
				women to her Great Lakes home, but she also shares the warmth and tenderness
				that Lucy’s mother exhibited during Lucy’s childhood. In response, Lucy displays
				a similar ambivalence towards Mariah as she does toward her own mother, wavering
				between deep affection, pity, and resentment. The ways in which Mariah differs
				from Lucy’s mother also shed light on Lucy’s past. When Lucy appreciates
				Mariah’s good humor and tolerance, she exposes the lack of such traits in her
				mother. Despite her rage toward her mother, however, she also betrays her
				admiration for her when she derides Mariah for lacking the strength her mother
				would show in dealing with Lewis.

Mariah epitomizes traits of the new world to which Lucy has fled. Her
				wealth and privilege initially strike Lucy as the keys to happiness, though Lucy
				often disdains the naïve arrogance that accompanies Mariah’s good fortune.
				Mariah’s liberal attitude toward her children impresses Lucy, who hopes to
				emulate Mariah when she has her own family. Yet as Lucy learns that Mariah’s
				advantages fail to protect her from the unhappiness of a bad marriage, Mariah’s
				way of life loses its charm, and Lucy comes to understand the universality of
				human dissatisfaction and suffering, a knowledge that both matures and embitters
				her. Mariah, for her part, shows her imperious side once Lucy decides to leave
				her behind, which calls her generous and egalitarian impulses into question and
				underscores the ultimate distinctions between Lucy and herself. Though Mariah
				aids in Lucy’s journey to independence, Lucy must break with her in order to
				truly pursue her freedom.

