Gandalf and Théoden leave Isengard to meet Fangorn. Aragorn
					and his cohorts, staying behind, are given human food obtained by
					the Ents, a welcome change from the Orc food that disgusts them.
					The two hobbits offer Gimli some tobacco from barrels they have
					discovered at Isengard. The dwarf regrets not having a pipe with
					which to smoke the tobacco, but Pippin gives Gimli a pipe of his
					own, which Gimli may keep. Gimli is grateful. 

Pippin tells the tale of his adventures since he was separated
					from his friends. Aragorn returns the hobbits’ knives and the Elf-brooch that
					he found on the way. Merry tells of the Ent assembly and the trees’
					decision to go to battle against Saruman, describing the Ents’ speed
					and great strength in destroying the stone walls of the wizard’s fortress.
					The hobbits also relate Gandalf’s meeting with Treebeard to seek
					help. The Ents responded by breaking the dams nearby and flooding
					the earth under Isengard with water. The Orcs in the lower areas
					were wiped out.

“You have become a fool, Saruman, and
						yet pitiable. You might still have turned away from folly and evil.
						. . But you choose to stay and gnaw the ends of your own plots.”

Gandalf and his group set off for the gates of Orthanc
					to try to make contact with Saruman. Watching the windows of the
					tower, Gandalf calls out Saruman’s name, but gets no response. Finally,
					a window opens and they hear the voice of Gríma Wormtongue, Saruman’s
					a spy in Théoden’s court. Wormtongue asks what the visitors want. Gandalf
					impatiently demands to speak to Saruman himself. Finally Saruman
					speaks. He addresses the travelers in a sad and self-pitying voice,
					using his powers in an attempt to persuade and placate them.

Saruman first speaks to the Riders of Rohan, claiming
					that he only wants peace for all. Théoden and his men are initially
					dazzled by Saruman, but Gimli interrupts the wizard to accuse him
					of deceit. Saruman tries to maintain his cool, but he explodes in
					rage when Gandalf rebukes him. Gandalf responds by breaking Saruman’s staff.
					Saruman falls down. The enraged Wormtongue, hidden from view, seeks
					revenge by throwing a glowing crystal sphere out of the tower window.
					The globe misses Gandalf and rolls along the ground. Pippin picks
					it up.

The group prepares to leave Orthanc. As they do, they
					hear a piercing cry from Saruman’s quarters. Gandalf knows that
					Saruman has realized the loss of the precious globe that Wormtongue
					threw out the window. As they leave the gates, Gandalf introduces
					Fangorn to Legolas and Gimli. Gandalf asks the Ent to fill the gorge around
					Orthanc with water, ensuring that Saruman can never escape. Fangorn
					promises that the Ents will do so.

As Gandalf and Théoden retreat from Isengard, the wizard
					carries Merry with him on Shadowfax, while Aragorn carries Pippin. Merry
					and Gandalf chat. They ride late into the night and then stop to
					camp. Pippin asks Merry whether Gandalf seems different now that
					he has come back from the dead, and Merry replies that the wizard
					seems both happier and more serious.

Merry is sleepy and tired of Pippin’s questioning, and
					he soon falls asleep. But Pippin, unable to sleep, is tormented
					by curiosity about the crystal globe Wormtongue threw out of the
					tower. Pippin sneaks over to the sleeping Gandalf and snatches the
					globe. Gazing into it, Pippin is appalled by the sight of a dark
					flying creature approaching him, and then an image of an evil figure
					addressing him. He drops the globe and cries out in fear.

Gandalf awakens, angered at Pippin, as the globe is a palantír, one
					of the seven ancient seeing-stones that Sauron has turned to evil uses
					as devices to communicate with his minions from his tower in Mordor.
					Pippin’s glimpse into the palantír not only enabled
					the hobbit to see visions, but allowed Sauron to see Pippin and
					into the hobbit’s thoughts. Aragorn notes that the palantír explains
					how Saruman was able to communicate with Sauron, and Gandalf notes that
					the palantír likely played a large part in the
					corruption of the formerly good Saruman. Gandalf also says that
					the sight of Pippin in the globe will confuse the Dark Lord, and
					that the group can make good use of the delay caused by this confusion.
					The wizard explains that the winged creature Pippin saw in the globe
					is one of the Nazgûl, the Ringwraiths who pursued
					the hobbits earlier in the novel. Gandalf proposes to take Pippin
					away on Shadowfax and to ride as far as the court of Edoras.

The scene in Chapter 9 in which
					various trivial items (the “flotsam and jetsam” of the chapter’s
					title) are exchanged forms a rather static interlude between episodes
					of action, but it reveals a great deal about the personalities of
					the heroes. When Pippin gives Gimli his tobacco pipe, we glimpse
					the everyday world of small pleasures and minor details that is
					just as important as the drama of catastrophic conflict and heroic
					action in The Lord of the Rings. Pippin’s pipe
					is a far cry from the Ring, having no bearing on the outcome of
					history, ignored by kings and wizards, and uninvolved in any prophecies
					or destinies. Yet the pipe is nevertheless a significant object,
					a symbol of the values of caring and friendship that make the Fellowship
					possible in the first place. Pippin gives Gimli a pipe, a tool of brief
					respite from the burden of the quest, as a gesture of good will, simply
					because Pippin cares for Gimli and wants him to be comfortable.
					Though perhaps a humble, overlooked gesture, the gift of the pipe
					embodies the selflessness that is central to the whole novel.

The portrayal of Wormtongue speaking from the window of Orthanc
					broadens Tolkien’s exploration of evil. Wormtongue is not an impressive,
					powerful villain like Saruman, but a much lesser figure who embodies
					corruption and evil on a small scale. Tolkien, as he often does
					in his fiction, associates a facility with sweet words and eloquent
					phrasing with corruption and deceit in his presentation of Wormtongue.
					When Gandalf reveals Wormtongue’s role as spy against Théoden, Wormtongue’s
					response is to use a fine speech to sway Théoden against Gandalf.
					This deliberate language is precisely what Gandalf uses against
					Wormtongue when he calls the spy a “jester.” A jester deals with
					language rather than actions, using words playfully for entertainment—an
					accusation that strikes a raw nerve in Wormtongue. Equally important,
					Tolkien portrays Wormtongue as completely unable to control his
					emotions. Wormtongue’s rash toss of the palantír—a
					great loss to Saruman, as the sphere is a valuable tool—suggests
					the danger of emotional outpouring. The emotional instability of
					Wormtongue emphasizes, by contrast, the moderation and self-control
					that Tolkien values as heroic.

Pippin’s succumbing to his urge to gaze into the palantír shows
					us the “human” side of this endearing character, as well as another example
					of the corrupting power of Sauron’s evil. While Pippin does not
					steal the palantír from the sleeping Gandalf, it
					is clear that the hobbit knows he is doing something he should not
					be doing. Yet Tolkien structures the scene to enable us to sympathize
					easily with Pippin, making clear the allure of the palantír. Tolkien
					narrates the scene from Pippin’s point of view to enhance our understanding
					of the hobbit’s motivations. On one level, Pippin is simply bored, unable
					to sleep, and fascinated by a mysterious object. His moral failing
					here is nothing more than the common human flaw of curiosity, augmented
					by the pull of the palantír. Gandalf later notes
					that Sauron appropriated the seeing-stones, which were originally
					tools used for good by the ancient kings of Gondor, for evil purposes—yet another
					example of the Dark Lord’s corruption.

Pippin’s glimpse of the frightening Nazgûl in
					the seeing-stone etches the reality of Mordor more clearly in our
					minds. Prior to this moment, the only character to have actually
					seen Mordor is Frodo, who glimpses it from the top of Amon Hen at
					the end of The Fellowship of the Ring. For the
					other characters, and for us as readers, Mordor has primarily been
					only a vague idea of evil far in the distance, a general destination
					to reach eventually. As the novel progresses, Mordor’s presence
					is felt more strongly. Gandalf’s words remind us that, though at
					times the evil of Sauron may slip from the characters’ minds, Sauron
					is constantly watching and searching for the characters, focused
					obsessively on the Ring.

