John Yossarian, the protagonist of Catch-22, is
				both a member of the squadron’s community and alienated by it. Although
				he flies and lives with the men, he is marked as an outsider by
				the fact that many of the men think he is insane. Even his Assyrian
				name is unusual; no one has ever heard it before. His difference
				from the rest of the men leads us to expect something exceptional
				from Yossarian.

But Yossarian’s characteristics are not those of a typical
				hero. He does not risk his life to save others; in fact, his primary
				goal throughout the novel is to avoid risking his
				life whenever possible. But the system of values around Yossarian
				is so skewed that this approach seems to be the only truly moral
				stance he can take, if only because it is so logical. What we come
				to hate about military bureaucracy as we read Catch-22 is
				its lack of logic; men are asked to risk their lives again and again
				for reasons that are utterly illogical and unimportant. In this
				illogical world, Yossarian seizes hold of one true, logical idea—that
				he should try to preserve life. Unlike a conventional hero, however,
				Yossarian does not generalize this idea to mean that he should risk
				his own life in attempts to save everybody else’s. In a world where
				life itself is so undervalued and so casually lost, it is possible
				to redefine heroism as simple self-preservation.

This insistence on self-preservation creates a conflict
				for Yossarian. Even though he is determined to save his own life
				at all costs, he nonetheless cares deeply for the other members
				of his squadron and is traumatized by their deaths. His ongoing
				horror at Snowden’s death stems both from his pity for Snowden and
				from his horrified realization that his own body is just as destructible
				as Snowden’s. In the end, when offered a choice between his own
				safety and the safety of the entire squadron, Yossarian is unable
				to choose himself over others. This concern for others complicates
				the simple logic of self-preservation, and creates its own Catch-22:
				life is not worth living without a moral concern for the well-being
				of others, but a moral concern for the well-being of others endangers
				one’s life. Yossarian ultimately escapes this conundrum by literally
				walking away from the war—an action that refuses both the possibility
				of becoming an officer who avoids danger at the expense of his troops
				and that of remaining a soldier who risks his life for meaningless
				reasons.

