I will make you exceedingly fruitful;
					and I will make nations of you, and kings shall come from you.

Nine generations of Shem’s descendants, the Semites, pass.
					God calls on a man named Abram, living with his father Terah and
					his wife Sarai in Haran, a city in upper Mesopotamia. God makes
					a covenant with Abram, promising to make Abram’s descendants into
					a great nation. Abram agrees to leave his home and move southwest to
					Canaan with his wife and his nephew, Lot, to a land that God has promised
					to give to Abram’s descendants. Abram takes up residence there and
					erects a number of altars throughout the land as symbols of his
					devotion to God.

After a brief stay in Egypt, Abram becomes wealthy and
					returns to Canaan, where, with the help of only 318 men,
					he defeats a legion of marauding armies from the East that has descended
					upon Sodom, where Lot is currently living. The king of
					Sodom recognizes Abram for his great deed, and the priest Melchizedek
					blesses Abram with a gift of bread and wine. Abram returns home
					where God speaks to him again regarding his covenant. Abram’s descendants,
					God promises, will be as numerous as the stars in the sky. A ceremony
					is performed in which God passes a blazing pot through pieces of
					sacrificed animals, symbolizing that his promise will not be broken.
					The writer notes that God considers Abram’s faith in him as a form
					of righteousness.

Sarai cannot become pregnant, but she wants to give her
					husband an heir. To this end, she sends her handmaiden Hagar to
					sleep with Abram. When Sarai becomes upset because of Hagar’s contempt,
					the handmaiden flees in fear. God speaks to Hagar and comforts her,
					promising her a son who will be a “wild ass of a man,” and Hagar
					returns to give birth to Abram’s first son, Ishmael (16:12). Once
					again, God speaks with Abram, this time enjoining Abram to remain
					blameless in his behavior and adding a new requirement to his everlasting
					covenant. Abram and all his descendants must now be circumcised
					as a symbol of the covenant, and God promises Abram a son through
					Sarai. The son is to be called Isaac, and it will be through Isaac that
					the covenant is fulfilled. God renames Abram “Abraham,” meaning
					“father of many,” and gives Sarai a new name, “Sarah.”

One day, God appears to Abraham in the form of three
					men. The three men say that Sarah will have a son, but Sarah, who
					is now ninety years old, laughs. The three men travel toward the
					eastern cities of Sodom and Gomorrah to destroy the cities because
					of their flagrant wickedness and corruption. Abraham pleads on the
					cities’ behalf, convincing the Lord not to destroy the cities if
					only a handful of good men can be found there. The men enter the
					city of Sodom, and Lot welcomes them into his home. Night falls,
					and the men of the city surround Lot’s home, wishing to rape the
					three messengers. The messengers persuade Lot to flee the city with
					his family, telling him and his family not to look back as they
					leave. However, as God rains down burning sulfur on Sodom and Gomorrah,
					Lot’s wife looks back at her home and is turned into a pillar of
					salt.

Abraham continues to gain political status in the area
					of Canaan, and Sarah eventually gives birth to Isaac. At Sarah’s
					bidding, Abraham sends Hagar and Ishmael away. God again speaks
					to Abraham in a test, asking Abraham to kill his son, Isaac, as
					a sacrifice. Abraham quietly resolves to obey, and when he takes
					Isaac to the mountains, Isaac asks what animal they are going to
					sacrifice. Abraham replies that God will provide an offering. Isaac
					is laid on the altar, and just as Abraham is ready to strike, the
					angel of the Lord stops him. God is impressed with Abraham’s great
					devotion and, once again, reaffirms his covenant.

Sarah dies. Abraham sends his chief servant
					to Abraham’s relatives in Assyria to find a wife for Isaac, to prevent
					his lineage from being sullied by Canaanite influence. The servant
					prays to be guided to the correct wife for Isaac. God leads him
					to Rebekah, whom he brings back to Isaac. Isaac marries Rebekah,
					and Abraham dies soon thereafter.

This section contrasts with the earlier parts of Genesis
					by telling the extended story of one man, Abraham, and his family
					rather than combining stories, songs, and genealogies.
					Genesis traces Abraham’s ancestry to Noah’s son, Shem, in order
					to establish that Abraham is a member of both the Hebrew and Semitic
					peoples. Historically, tribes of nomadic people known as habiru—many
					of whom were Semitic—frequently moved among the ancient Canaanite
					cities; scholars believe that these nomads may be the roots of the
					Hebrew people. Whether or not Abraham was indeed the original ancestor
					of the Hebrew people is uncertain. But the story of Abraham is nevertheless
					significant to the religious tradition of faith and obedience it
					prescribes.

God’s affirmation of his covenant with humankind now
					takes the form of an ongoing, personal relationship with a specific
					man and his descendants. The authors of Genesis describe God himself
					as a storyteller who uses the lives of the people who are obedient
					to him to describe a divine plot. God creates various symbols
					as reminders of the covenant, including the fiery pot at his second
					encounter with Abram, the custom of circumcision, and the renaming
					of Abram and Sarai. Poetic devices further emphasize the literary
					nature of the story and the importance of the covenant. God first
					verbalizes his covenant with Abram in the form of a song and later
					comforts Hagar in verse. These elements, especially the poetic,
					provide a break in the Genesis narrative, slowing down the plot
					and suggesting the grand, metaphysical significance of God’s promise
					to Abraham.

These stories demonstrate the ways in which God gives
					dramatic rewards for absolute faith and obedience. At God’s command, Abraham
					leaves his home to roam in a strange land; God’s reward is to cause
					Abraham to discover great wealth. Sarah, barren her entire life,
					gives birth to a son at the age of ninety, an event so unlikely
					that she laughs when she is told that it will occur. And finally,
					Abraham receives God’s greatest praise when he obediently stands
					poised to kill the very son through whom God has promised to fulfill
					his covenant. These moments depict absolute faith in God, despite
					the fact that his demands may seem illogical or unreasonable. What
					God consistently rewards is the abandonment of human reason and
					free will in favor of actions whose purpose is unknown or unknowable. As
					a result, these stories establish a version of God who knows what is
					best for mankind, but who reveals his purposes only selectively.

Another characteristic of the Old Testament God is the
					elusive manner in which he communicates with humans. Sometimes,
					people directly encounter God, as when God and Abraham converse. Frequently,
					however, God appears in the form of someone or something else, as
					when he visits Abraham in the form of three men. Throughout the
					Old Testament, God is alternately seen and unseen. Unlike the epics
					of the ancient Greeks, in which every event or action is described
					in full detail, there are always details in Genesis and the Hebrew
					Bible that remain unexplained because God so often insists on removing
					himself from the action. The most important instance of God’s absence
					is when God tests Abraham. After requesting that Abraham sacrifice
					Isaac, God disappears without stating his true intentions, leaving
					Abraham to move forward in silence to the mountain where he will,
					supposedly, kill his son. In this story, God’s absence serves the
					purpose of testing Abraham’s faith in the infallibility of God,
					even when God does not explain his demands. Furthermore, the removal
					of God from the story greatly increases the drama and suspense of
					the Genesis narrative.

