Intelligent and introspective, Jim is well qualified to
				be the narrator of the story. His thoughtfulness gives him the ability
				to portray himself and others with consistency and sympathy and
				to convey the sense of a lost Nebraska with an evocative, poetic
				accuracy. Furthermore, his romantic nature and strong attachment
				to the people of his youth and to the Nebraska landscape give his
				narrative a sense of deep commitment and a longing, nostalgic quality
				that colors his story. The wistful nature of Jim’s memoir highlights
				the novel’s emphasis on the past as something personal to the individual
				who remembers it, which Jim acknowledges in choosing to call his
				memoir “My Ántonia” rather than “Ántonia.” Jim
				is not claiming ownership of Ántonia; he is indicating that the
				story of Ántonia contained within his memoir is just as much a product
				of his own mind and heart as it is of the past.

Over the course of the novel, Jim ages from a ten-year-old
				boy into a middle-aged man, and grows from a shy orphan into a successful
				lawyer for the railroad companies, acquiring an impressive education
				along the way at the University of Nebraska and Harvard. In spite
				of the great changes that he undergoes, Jim remains a consistent
				character. He always has interest in others but is content to spend
				time alone; he often assumes the role of the detached observer watching
				situations unfold. The word “I” appears in My Ántonia with
				surprising infrequency, given the fact that the novel is a first-person
				memoir. Only at the end of the novel, when Jim sets aside his reservations
				to reunite with the middle-aged Ántonia on the Cuzak farm, does
				he seem to move past his passive role and make an active attempt
				to connect with the past he cannot forget.

Jim’s most important relationship in the novel, of course,
				is his friendship with Ántonia, and the fact that he allows Ántonia
				to recede in his mind as an abstract symbol of the past is itself
				a strong illustration of Jim’s introspective mentality. Rather than
				remaining close to Ántonia through the years, Jim allows himself
				to drift apart from her, always preserving her special place in
				his heart by treating her memory with greater and greater nostalgia
				as the years go by. Though the final segment of the novel—Jim’s
				reunion with Ántonia after twenty years apart—is not presented as
				a staggering breakthrough, it nevertheless seems to be a great step
				forward in Jim’s growth and maturity. He can at last contemplate
				re-creating a real relationship with Ántonia, acknowledging that
				she still exists and is still herself even after the past that they
				shared has ended.

