Charlie Spring 

An openly gay Year 10 student at Truham Grammar School for Boys and one of the novel’s protagonists. Charlie is handsome, popular, intelligent, and talented. He’s also shy, self-conscious, and overly apologetic, in part because he was bullied when he came out as gay. His high school experience is dominated by complex romantic entanglements, first with the possessive, violent Ben Hope and then with the kind but seemingly straight Nick Nelson. Through the help of his teachers and his romance with Nick, he learns to capitalize on his strengths, trust his instincts, and stand up for himself.  

Read an in-depth analysis of Charlie Spring

Nick (Nicholas) Nelson 

Year 11 rugby player at Truham Grammar School for Boys and one of the novel’s protagonists. Nick is a popular, well-built athlete who struggles with the school’s academic requirements, making him an unlikely friend for the bookish Charlie. As the two grow closer, Nick is surprised at how much he likes Charlie, to the extent that he begins questioning his sexuality. Throughout the novel, Nick grapples with the idea that sexual preference might be a spectrum and that his romantic feelings for Charlie are worthy of further exploration. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Nick Nelson

Ben Hope 

Upper-class student at Truham Grammar School for Boys and Charlie’s make-out partner. Aggressive and self-absorbed, Ben initially expresses admiration for Charlie’s courage in coming out. However, Ben keeps their entanglements a secret and will not commit to be in a relationship with Charlie. When Charlie tries to end their dalliance, Ben attempts to sexually assault him.  

Read an in-depth analysis of Ben Hope

Miss Singh 

PE teacher and former professional rugby player. Miss Singh pays close attention to her students and is a thoughtful gay advocate. Despite Charlie’s concerns about playing rugby for the first time, Miss Singh welcomes him to the team. When Nick embraces Charlie after a win, she silences their teammates’ speculations about Nick’s sexuality.  

Tao Xu 

Charlie’s friend and classmate. Protective of Charlie, Tao serves as a sort of relationship barometer for his friend, letting him know how problematic his crush on Nick might be. Although Tao is merely trying to shield him from harm, Charlie disagrees with his pessimistic view of Nick.  

Tori (Victoria) Spring 

Charlie’s older sister. Tori is distant but supportive, which she demonstrates through a gentle concern for Charlie’s well-being. She observes Nick as Charlie spends time with him and tells Charlie she doesn’t think Nick is straight.  

Tara Jones  

Nick’s crush from junior high school. Nick and Tara have not seen one another in years. When Tara’s reveals she’s gay at Harry’s birthday party, she opens the door for Nick to talk about his own sexuality. 

Harry Greene 

Nick’s wealthy, entitled 16-year-old friend. Rude, forceful, and bullying, Harry demands that Nick connect with his old crush Tara and makes fun of Charlie’s potential crush on Nick.  

Nellie 

Nick’s dog. She becomes the excuse for Charlie to go to Nick’s house for the first time.  

Christian, Sai, Otis 

Rugby team players at Truham Grammar School for Boys.  

Mr. Lange 

Literature instructor of a vertical class at Truham Grammar School for Boys. 

Sarah Nelson 

Nick’s mom. She notices that Nick is more himself around Charlie than he is around his other friends. 

Jane and Julio Spring 

Charlie’s parents. 

Oliver Spring 

Charlie’s brother. 

Darcy Olsson 

Tara’s girlfriend. 

