Naomi remembers taking the train to Slocan in 1942,
					when she was around five years old. Stephen was on crutches. A young
					woman on the train had recently given birth to a premature baby
					and had no supplies. Obasan gave her apples and oranges, and an
					old woman gave her an underskirt to make diapers. Naomi played with
					her toys, particularly an ornamental doll, now battered, that Mother gave
					her before going to Japan.

In 1962, at age twenty-six, Naomi
					joins Aunt Emily, Uncle, and Obasan and revisits some of the old
					ghost towns, including Slocan. No trace of the Japanese Canadian
					presence remained. Naomi remembers arriving at Slocan as a child
					and bumping into Nakayama-sensei, the Anglican priest from Vancouver.
					He walked them through the forest to their new house. On the way,
					Naomi realized she had lost her doll. The two-room hut was crumbling, low-ceilinged,
					and dark. Stephen and Naomi went back outside, where they saw dozens
					of butterflies. Stephen slashed at them with his crutch because,
					he told Naomi, they eat your clothes.

Naomi, Stephen, and Obasan shared the house in Slocan
					with Nomura-obasan, an elderly woman. One day, when Obasan was away,
					Nomura-obasan had to use the bedpan, but Naomi couldn’t find it
					anywhere. She helped Nomura-obasan to the outhouse and had to stay
					in there with her until she finished. Inside, Stephen played the
					records Mother loved. Naomi had stopped asking about her lost doll.

Naomi remembers staring on a bridge in Slocan with Obasan
					after Grandma Nakane died in New Denver, an hour’s drive from Slocan, following
					an illness. She thought, then, about the need to put other people’s
					desires before your own, and to “make the way smooth by restraining
					emotion.” To do otherwise is to be wagamama—self-absorbed
					and rude.

During the funeral, Naomi drew and Stephen sulked. Afterward, Obasan
					explained that Grandpa Nakane was Buddhist, unlike the Christian
					Katos, and therefore Grandma Nakane would be cremated. She took
					Naomi and Stephen to the funeral pyre. Stephen was allowed to set
					the pyre alight. Naomi thought of something Obasan had told Stephen:
					Just as samurai swords are subjected to fire, people are strengthened
					by hard experiences.

Winter came to Slocan. One snowy day, they learned that
					Uncle was coming to join them. Obasan rearranged the furniture and
					cooked. When Uncle arrived, she greeted him in an official-sounding
					voice. The adults discussed Naomi and Stephen’s father. Naomi asked where
					he was, and Stephen scoffed at her ignorance. He played the flutes
					Uncle had brought. In the following days, Uncle made many improvements
					to the hut. He pulled Stephen on a homemade sled to the hospital,
					where Stephen’s cast was removed.

With Stephen’s help, Uncle built a garden in the yard.
					Everyone in the family gathered ferns, mushrooms, and berries to
					eat. In 1943, Stephen and Naomi started attending
					an all-Japanese school. One day they played in the woods with Kenji
					and Miyuki, two of their classmates. They climbed up to Minnie’s
					Bluff, where they saw a kingbird. Kenji said that according to Rough
					Lock Bill, an ornery local man, kingbirds slice the tongues of liars
					in half.

In these chapters, Naomi gives herself over fully to the
					past, immersing herself in memories of her childhood. Perhaps because
					of the power and immediacy of Aunt Emily’s letters, and Naomi’s
					own internalization of Aunt Emily’s insistence that the past must
					be faced, Naomi manages to get over her initial unwillingness to remember
					old and painful memories. Instead of shifting back and forth between
					World War II and present day affairs, as in earlier chapters, the
					narrative in chapters 15 through 20 settles
					in the 1940s. By sticking with the World
					War II era storyline, these chapters show Naomi’s new willingness
					to remember her childhood. At the same time, stepping away from
					the present day storyline allows us, the readers, to become absorbed
					in the Slocan plot.

By playing with the ornamental doll, the young Naomi retains
					a connection to her distant mother. She also channels her own feelings into
					the toy. She imagines that despite her impassive face, the train ride
					privately excites the doll. Pretending to make the doll talk, she offers
					Stephen food and entertainment. Naomi is too retiring and perhaps
					traumatized to express these feelings and impulses in her own voice,
					but the doll gives her a vent for her emotions.

The loss of the doll is an important marker of Naomi’s
					increasing worldliness. Since the doll is associated with Naomi’s
					mother, its absence suggests the distance Naomi feels from her mother,
					the ultimate protector of her innocence. Perhaps even more significant
					than the loss is Naomi’s response to that loss. By Chapter 17,
					she has stopped asking for her doll, which points to her ability
					to endure hardship uncomplainingly, and her increasing awareness
					that adults can’t fix every problem. Earlier in the same chapter,
					the young Naomi loses another piece of her innocence when she shoulders
					the adult responsibility of helping the sick, elderly Nomura-obasan
					use the outhouse.

But Naomi is still unmistakably a child, and her youth
					can be a source of frustration. Unlike Stephen, she is often left
					in the dark because adults consider her too young to handle disturbing
					information. As a result, she doesn’t know key facts, such as where
					their father is. While she makes tentative steps toward maturity
					in these chapters, she is still easily confused. When Kenji tells
					her kingbirds cut out the tongues of liars, she half believes him,
					lying awake at night and worrying about the lies the bird has heard.
					On the other hand, Naomi’s youth protects her. Unlike Stephen, she
					doesn’t quite grasp the reality of death or imprisonment, and the
					difficulties of their lives don’t fill her with a sense of injustice,
					as they do him. She sits placidly drawing during Grandma Nakane’s
					funeral, while Stephen sulks, a tableau that illustrates the siblings’
					different attitudes.

Despite the difficulty of the family’s situation, these
					chapters contain rays of hope. The removal of Stephen’s cast and
					the onset of spring create a sense of rejuvenation. Most important
					is the arrival of Uncle. His fatherly presence comforts everyone,
					and he makes significant improvements to the cabin and the yard.
					With Uncle and Obasan reunited, the makeshift family is complete.
					Still, despite the relative cheer of this portion of the novel, makeshift is
					the operative word. Uncle and Obasan stand in for Naomi and Stephen’s
					parents, but they can’t replace them.

