Although Louisa is the novel’s principal female character,
				she is distinctive from the novel’s other women, particularly her
				foils, Sissy and Rachael. While these other two embody the Victorian
				ideal of femininity—sensitivity, compassion, and gentleness—Louisa’s
				education has prevented her from developing such traits. Instead,
				Louisa is silent, cold, and seemingly unfeeling. However, Dickens
				may not be implying that Louisa is really unfeeling, but rather
				that she simply does not know how to recognize and express her emotions. For
				instance, when her father tries to convince her that it would be rational
				for her to marry Bounderby, Louisa looks out of the window at the
				factory chimneys and observes: “There seems to be nothing there
				but languid and monotonous smoke. Yet when the night comes, Fire
				bursts out.” Unable to convey the tumultuous feelings that lie beneath
				her own languid and monotonous exterior, Louisa can only state a
				fact about her surroundings. Yet this fact, by analogy, also describes
				the emotions repressed within her.

	Even though she does not conform to the Victorian ideals
				of femininity, Louisa does her best to be a model daughter, wife,
				and sister. Her decision to return to her father’s house rather
				than elope with Harthouse demonstrates that while she may be unfeeling,
				she does not lack virtue. Indeed, Louisa, though unemotional, still
				has the ability to recognize goodness and distinguish between right
				and wrong, even when it does not fall within the strict rubric of
				her father’s teachings. While at first Louisa lacks the ability
				to understand and function within the gray matter of emotions, she
				can at least recognize that they exist and are more powerful than
				her father or Bounderby believe, even without any factual basis.
				Moreover, under Sissy’s guidance, Louisa shows great promise in
				learning to express her feelings. Similarly, through her acquaintance
				with Rachael and Stephen, Louisa learns to respond charitably to
				suffering and to not view suffering simply as a temporary state
				that is easily overcome by effort, as her father and Bounderby do.

