On September 9, 1962—at the exact moment that India’s
					defense minister decides to use force, if necessary, against the
					Chinese army—Amina receives a telegram saying that Ahmed has suffered
					a “heartboot.” She announces that, after four years in Pakistan,
					the family is returning home to Bombay. Upon seeing her broken husband,
					Amina becomes determined to help him recover. During Ahmed’s recovery,
					the two gradually begin to fall in love with one another.

On October 9, as India prepares for war with China, Saleem reconvenes
					the conference. The children greet one another excitedly as if they
					are at a family reunion. Six days later, as India faces an unprovoked
					attack by China, the children begin to turn on Saleem, blaming him
					for Shiva’s absence and chastising him for having sealed off a part
					of his mind. On October 20, as the Indian army is badly beaten by
					Chinese forces, the children launch a full-scale attack against
					Saleem for his secrecy and elitism. During the next month, the children
					leave him, one by one.

After its initial defeat by the Chinese army, India experiences
					a new optimism, believing the defeat of the Chinese to be near at hand.
					At the same time, Saleem’s perpetually congested sinuses become
					completely blocked. As the war between India and China draws closer,
					Saleem’s sinus problems grow worse. On November 20, news of India’s
					defeat by the Chinese dominates the news. The papers proclaim, “Public
					Morale Drains Away.” The next day, the advancing Chinese army halts
					its progress, and Saleem’s parents take him to the hospital to have
					his sinuses cleared. After the operation, Saleem discovers that
					his connection to the children has disappeared along with the congestion
					in his sinuses.

Amina convinces Ahmed that they should move to Pakistan
					and join her sisters, and they sell their house on Methwold’s Estate
					to the Narlikar women. On their last day in Bombay, Saleem takes
					the letter from the prime minister, the newspaper photo, and an
					old tin globe and buries them on the property. The family arrives
					in Karachi on February 9. Soon afterward, Jamila begins her singing
					career, while Saleem enjoys the pleasure of being able to smell
					for the first time in his life.

Saleem’s nose can now detect emotions, feelings, and lies,
					as well as smells. Saleem’s sense of smell has become so acute that,
					upon arriving at Karachi, he can smell his aunt Alia’s bitterness
					and hypocrisy. Living with his aunt in the shadows of a mosque at
					the center of Karachi, Saleem explores the city on his Lambretta
					scooter. Ahmed decides to build the family a new home and has the
					land consecrated with the brine and umbilical cord from Saleem’s
					birth. 

Still emotionally attached to Bombay, Saleem finds himself unable
					to feel at home in the overwhelmingly Muslim Pakistan. Ahmed buys
					a towel factory, names it after his wife, and declares that someday
					he will produce the most famous towel in the world. Soon after,
					Major (Retired) Alauddin Latif comes to hear Jamila sing. Saleem
					and Jamila nickname him Uncle Puffs. Uncle Puffs becomes a fixture
					at the house and makes Jamila a famous singer. He keeps her face
					hidden from her audience, however, claiming that a horrible accident
					has disfigured her face. Jamila performs behind a curtain, which
					has a single hole for her lips. 

Jamila becomes the most celebrated singer in Pakistan,
					and Saleem confesses that he was in love with her. He demonstrated
					his affection by bringing her fresh, leavened bread from a secret
					Catholic nunnery. Sullen and melancholy, Saleem spends his days
					riding his scooter, taking in the city’s smells. His fondness for
					profane smells brings him to Tai Bibi, who claims to be, at 512
					years old, the world’s oldest whore. Saleem finds Tai Bibi irresistible,
					because she can take on the scent of any person. While trying out
					a series of smells on Saleem, she finds one that particularly affects
					him. Saleem realizes that she’s taken on Jamila’s scent and runs
					out of Tai Bibi’s house.

General Zulfikar’s son, Zafar, becomes engaged to a prince’s daughter
					from Kif. The prince also has a son, Mutasim, who is well known
					for his looks and charm. At Zafar’s engagement ceremony, Jamila
					Singer performs, and Mutasim, who has yet to see her face, immediately
					falls in love with her. After hearing her sing, Mutasim takes Saleem
					aside and, after asking Saleem to describe his sister, tells Saleem
					that he has a love charm for her. Saleem tells Mutasim to hand him
					the charm, then creeps into his sister’s bedroom and gives it to
					her himself. He confesses his love to Jamila while pressing the charm
					against her palm. The charm works briefly, but Jamila is ashamed
					and horror stricken, even though she and Saleem share no blood relation.
					Saleem realizes that even though he and Jamila are not truly related,
					they are still brother and sister. Saleem reflects that the difference
					between his Indian childhood and Pakistani adolescence was the difference
					between an infinite variety of alternatives and an infinite number
					of lies. 

When Saleem returns to India, he once again finds the
					details of his personal life closely mirrored in the events of national
					politics. Amina learns of her husband’s “heartboot” just as the
					public learns of India’s intention to use necessary force against
					China. As Saleem notes, both of these revelations will end with
					an eviction, as China boots out the Indian troops and Saleem’s parents
					boot him out of India. India’s defeat in the war metaphorically
					drains the country of its optimism, just as Saleem’s operation literally
					drains his congested sinuses. In addition to the rhetorical similarity,
					the narrative also implies that Saleem, in losing his ability to
					communicate with the midnight’s children, becomes drained of hope
					and optimism along with India. His seemingly personal loss resonates
					across the entire country, since the Midnight’s Children’s Conference
					represented India’s potential future.

Back in Pakistan, the country’s religious dogmatism confronts Saleem.
					His life in Pakistan becomes riddled with hypocrisies and ironies.
					His aunt Alia, who once loved Ahmed, greets them effusively while
					inwardly seething with bitterness and resentment. Despite Pakistan’s
					reputation as the “Land of the Pure,” Saleem manages to discover
					the world’s oldest whore living in Karachi. The newly devout Jamila
					secretly yearns for leavened bread made by Catholic nuns. Finally,
					Ahmed attempts to consecrate his home’s building site with his son’s
					umbilical cord and afterbirth—which, as we know, may or may not
					actually belong to Saleem.

Throughout the novel, Rushdie remains intent on dismantling the
					false veneer of faith, exposing and exploring the essential human frailties
					and complexities that lie beneath. In Pakistan, Saleem actively
					resists that nation’s self-proclaimed purity. He seeks out the profane
					and wretched and, in the end, flouts a sacred social taboo by falling
					in love with his own sister. Jamila, on the other hand, becomes
					the embodiment of the passive and devout believer. However, because
					we have already witnessed Jamila’s growth and development, not to
					mention her forceful and magnetic personality, we know that underneath
					the ever-present veil remains a complex individual. Jamila’s love
					for the unleavened bread represents a seemingly minor transgression,
					but it highlights the fact that religious purity cannot completely
					efface an individual’s character or desires.

Throughout the novel, romantic love has remained noticeably absent
					or, at the very least, elusive. Often unrequited—and when it is
					requited, just as often erroneous and unfounded—romantic love has
					a played a complicated and frequently contradictory role in the novel’s
					development. Saleem blames his parents’ newfound love for the destruction
					of the Midnight’s Children’s Conference, just as his love for his
					sister ironically destroys the intimate connection they once shared.
					For Saleem, every act of love seems inevitably to carry an act of
					destruction with it, a connection that speaks as much to the complicated
					intentions behind each action as it does to a larger, universal
					claim about love’s cataclysmic potential. At the same time, unrequited
					love continues to play a dominant role in shaping the lives of the
					characters. From Mutasim’s and Saleem’s failed courtship of Jamila
					to Zafar’s never-consecrated marriage, love extracts a heavy toll.
					Alia, after a number of years, remains burdened by anger and jealousy
					at having been denied Ahmed’s love, while Jamila, shrouded in purity,
					remains unable to accept it.

