Moses is one of the few characters whose complete biography
				is described by the biblical narrative, and the early events of
				his life characterize him as a product of his circumstances. Born
				in Egypt, Moses is raised by Pharaoh’s daughter, who takes pity
				on the abandoned Hebrew baby. After an impulsive murder, Moses flees
				west, where he begins a life as a shepherd and stumbles into God
				in the form of a burning bush. He reluctantly agrees to return to
				Egypt and demand the Israelites’ release, but agrees to little more.
				Each event in the journey from Egypt to Mount Sinai, where God delivers
				his laws to the Israelites, propels Moses further into the roles
				of prophet, priest, ruler, and savior of Israel.

Moses’ most heroic virtue is his steadfast obedience,
				and it might be said that a passive quality permeates each of his
				miracles. Ten plagues strike Egypt because Moses simply appears
				in Pharaoh’s court to request the release of the Israelites. With
				the help of his rod, or divine staff, Moses parts the waters of
				the Red Sea merely by outstretching his arms. Later, the beleaguered
				Israelites defeat a mighty army when two men help Moses raise his
				hands for the duration of the battle. The image of a stationary
				man bringing about overwhelming physical feats is striking. Moses
				himself is far from passive or reticent, yet he represents a prototype
				of the biblical hero whose greatness lies not in self-assertion
				but in obedience to God.

Moses is a compelling figure because he possesses human
				faults. He is passionate and impulsive. Descending from Mount Sinai, Moses
				knows ahead of time that the people are worshipping a golden idol,
				because God has warned him of this fact. Upon seeing the people,
				Moses angrily breaks the stone tablets inscribed with God’s laws.
				God seems to value this passionate quality in Moses, for Moses is
				an effective mediator between God and the Israelites. He prays with
				a sense of urgency, unafraid to ask God to refrain from divine retribution
				and willing to accept the blame for the people’s actions. His earnest
				attention to the present situation and to God’s demands earns Moses
				the opportunity to speak with God face to face. Yet his passion
				remains his weakness. God commands Moses to produce water from a
				rock by speaking to it, but, irritated with the people’s complaints,
				Moses hits the rock with his staff. This act of negligence bars
				Moses from entering the very promised land to which he has guided
				the Israelites for almost half a century.

