. . . each contemplating the other in
					both mirrors of the reciprocal flesh of theirhisnothis fellowfaces.

Episode Seventeen is narrated in the third person through
					a set of 309 questions and their detailed
					and methodical answers, in the style of a catechism or Socratic
					dialogue. 

	Bloom and Stephen walk home chatting about music and
					politics. Arriving home, Bloom is frustrated to find that he forgot
					his key. He jumps over the fence, enters through the kitchen, and
					re-emerges at the front gate to let Stephen in. In the kitchen,
					Bloom puts the kettle on. Stephen declines Bloom’s offer to wash,
					as Stephen is a hydrophobe. The contents of Bloom’s kitchen are reviewed,
					including those that betray Boylan’s presence earlier in the day—a
					gift basket and betting tickets. The latter remind Bloom of the
					Gold Cup, and the misunderstanding between himself and Bantam Lyons
					(in Episode Five) dawns on him.

	Bloom serves cocoa for them both, and they drink in silence. Bloom,
					watching Stephen think, considers his own youthful forays into poetry.
					The narrative reveals that Bloom and Stephen have met twice before—once
					when Stephen was five, and another time when he was ten. On the
					latter occasion, Stephen invited Bloom to dinner at the Dedalus’s,
					and Bloom politely declined. Their personal histories are compared,
					as well as their temperaments—Stephen’s is artistic, while Bloom’s
					tends toward applied science through his interest in invention and
					advertising.

	The two men trade anecdotes, and Bloom considers the
					possibility of publishing a collection of Stephen’s stories. They
					recite and write Irish and Hebrew for each other. Stephen senses
					the past in Bloom, and Bloom senses the future in Stephen. Stephen
					goes on to chant the anti-Semitic medieval story of “Little Harry
					Hughes,” in which a Christian boy is beheaded by a Jew’s daughter.
					Stephen’s exposition of the story suggests that he could see both
					himself and Bloom as the Christian child of the story. But Bloom
					has mixed feelings and immediately thinks of his own “Jew’s daughter,”
					Millicent. Bloom remembers moments from Milly’s childhood and, thinking of
					a potential union between Stephen and Milly (or Molly), invites Stephen
					to stay the night. Stephen gratefully declines. Bloom returns Stephen’s
					money to him, rounded up one pence, and suggests a variety of future
					interactions. Stephen seems noncommittal, and Bloom becomes pessimistic.
					Stephen seems to share Bloom’s sense of dejection.

	Bloom shows Stephen out, and they urinate together in
					the yard while looking at the night sky, where a shooting star suddenly appears.
					Bloom lets Stephen out, and the two shake hands as the church bells
					ring. Bloom listens to Stephen’s footsteps and feels alone.

	Bloom goes back in. Entering the front room, he bumps
					his head on furniture that has been moved. He sits down and begins
					to disrobe. The contents of the room and Bloom’s budget for the
					day (omitting the money paid to Bella Cohen) are catalogued. Bloom’s ambition
					to own a simple bungalow in the suburbs is described. Bloom deposits
					Martha’s letter in his locked cabinet drawer and thinks pleasantly
					about his favorable interactions today with Mrs. Breen, Nurse Callan,
					and Gerty MacDowell. The contents of the second drawer include several
					family documents, including Bloom’s father’s suicide note. Bloom
					feels remorseful, mostly because he has not upheld his father’s
					beliefs and practices, such as keeping kosher. Bloom is grateful
					for his father’s monetary legacy, which saved him from poverty—here
					Bloom daydreams of his unrealized vagrant self, traveling all over
					the globe, navigating by the stars.

	Bloom’s revery ends, and he moves toward his bedroom,
					thinking of what he did and did not accomplish today. Entering the
					bedroom, Bloom notices more evidence of Boylan. Bloom’s mind skims over
					his assumed catalogue of Molly’s twenty-five past suitors, of which
					Boylan is only the latest. Bloom reflects on Boylan, feeling first
					jealous, then resigned.  

	Bloom kisses Molly’s behind, which is near his face,
					as he is sleeping with his head at the foot of the bed. Molly wakes
					up, and Bloom tells her about his day with several omissions and
					lies. He tells Molly about Stephen, whom he describes as a professor
					and author. Molly is silently aware that it has been over ten years
					since she and Bloom have had sexual intercourse. Bloom is silently
					aware of the tenseness of their relations since the onset of Milly’s
					puberty. As the episode comes to a close, Molly is described as
					“Gea-Tellus,” Earth Mother, while Bloom is both an infant in the
					womb and the sailor returned and resting from his travels. A typographical
					dot ends the episode and indicates Bloom’s resting place. 

Episode Seventeen, “Ithaca,” is often read as the final
					episode depicting Ulysses’ wanderings—the large dot at the end of
					the episode seems to function as a period to the long sentence that
					is the novel proper. Yet Episode Seventeen offers no easy or triumphant resolution.
					The cold, scientific objectivity of the reporting underscores the
					unfamiliar and untriumphant quality of Bloom’s Odyssean homecoming.
					The narrative style is replete with detail, yet not all the details
					seem particularly relevant. Thus, just as we reach the climactic
					episode of Bloom and Stephen’s union, the narrative style switches
					to an encyclopedic narrative—the opposite of a traditionally plotted
					story in which all information pertains and leads up to a climax
					and a meaning or moral. Joyce refuses to wrap up the emotional strands
					of the novel, or to offer a heavy-handed moral. Instead we are left
					with a consistently ambivalent final view of our two male protagonists. 

				The final union between Stephen and Bloom is infused
					with positive symbolic importance through the episode’s ritualistic
					diction and universal motifs of death and creation. Yet the form
					of the episode, with its itemized narrative style, also highlights
					Bloom’s and Stephen’s differences even more succinctly, and the
					union cannot be said to be a practical success. Though Stephen has
					begun to sober up and become more personable, the perceived gap
					between them is reinforced by Stephen’s blatantly anti-Semitic story,
					inexplicably offered after a heartwarming exchange of the Irish
					and Hebrew languages, in which the two men feel the similarity of
					their “races.” There is evidence that Stephen does not mean for
					the story to be an aggressive gesture—he seems to use it, as he
					has many things today, as a kind of parable, indeed, a parable in
					which both himself and Bloom can be figured as victims and receive
					redemption. Bloom’s and Stephen’s failures to consider each other’s
					modes of reception causes the disconnect. Here lies the lesson of
					Episode Seventeen, to the extent that there is one: any coming-together
					must also be marked by a recognition of otherness. 

Stephen’s and Bloom’s most successfully close moments
					in Episode Seventeen reflect this lesson—for example, their sharing
					of the Irish and Hebrew languages is marked by otherness. Bloom
					and Stephen both co-opt languages that neither is fluent in to enact
					this meeting of cultures. And it is at this moment that both, looking
					at and listening to each other, recognize what is alien in the other—Stephen
					hears the past in Bloom, and Bloom sees the future in Stephen. This
					interplay of strangeness and familiarity is again replayed in the
					garden scene. Joyce exploits this interplay not just in the meeting
					and parting of Bloom and Stephen, but in the reading experience
					of Ithaca itself. In the obtusely scientific and literal narrative
					of the episode, things familiar to us, like a kettle boiling, are made
					strange. Like Bloom and Stephen, we readers must appreciate what
					is strange in order to recognize the familiar.

										The second half of Episode Seventeen details
					Bloom’s return to his house and his preparation for bed. This corresponds
					to Odysseus’s return to his court, where he slays Penelope’s suitors
					then reveals himself to Penelope, who has slept through the slaughter.
					Yet upending this heroic dimension, as always, is the prosaic—in
					Episode Seventeen, Bloom is shown to be most pathetically bourgeois. The
					fantasy of Bloom as the dark wanderer is tempered by the extensive
					description of Bloom’s ultimate ambition to own a well-furnished
					suburban bungalow. These competing perspectives hold each other
					in check, and to the extent that Bloom emerges as a hero in the
					bourgeois context, it is because he is able to replicate the narrative’s
					technique of shifting perspective. Bloom can pragmatically see himself
					in the context of a single night’s sleep, a lifetime’s work, or
					a universe’s lifetime. Bloom bests Boylan through a similarly impressive
					display of shifting perspective—Bloom contextualizes Boylan not
					as a equal and immediate rival, but as one of many, not the first
					nor the last. Ulysses dwells on the idea that shifting
					perspective forces one to question one’s own moral judgment. To
					the extent that Bloom duplicates this practice within himself, he
					emerges as the hero of the book. As you may imagine, though, there
					is another perspective on this, and it is Molly’s perspective in
					Episode Eighteen that finally flushes out the biased visions of
					her that have held precedence thus far.

