Later on the same day as the garden party, Strether accompanies Chad
					on a visit to Madame de Vionnet’s home. After a few minutes, however,
					Chad departs and leaves Strether alone with Madame de Vionnet. Strether
					takes note of his surroundings, registering the differences among
					the homes of Madame de Vionnet, Chad, and Miss Gostrey. Madame de
					Vionnet asks Strether to become her friend and, in turn, to open
					himself up to the idea of accepting her and her daughter, Jeanne.
					She then asks him about Mrs. Newsome, wondering if she has given
					up on Strether’s ever pulling away from the lure of Europe. She
					urges Strether to tell Mrs. Newsome the complete truth about herself
					and her daughter. Strether asks her if she wants Chad to marry her
					daughter. She says no, and when Strether presses, Madame de Vionnet
					explains that “He likes her too much.” Strether assumes she means
					that he likes her too much to hurt her by taking her to America.
					Madame de Vionnet asks Strether to convince Mrs. Newsome that she
					has been a good influence on Chad. This seems like a simple enough
					request to Strether, so he assures her that he will try to “save”
					her if he can.

Ten days later, Chad urges Strether to get to know Jeanne
					de Vionnet. Chad claims that he wants to know what Strether thinks
					of the young lady. For reasons Strether does not understand, he
					agrees to meet with her. In Chad’s parlor, Strether finds himself
					with Jeanne and remarks that she is a rather beautiful child—a girl
					who has received an excellent upbringing from her mother, as well
					as a good education. However, Strether has trouble understanding
					what service he is providing to Chad by being there, next wondering
					if he might actually be doing Mrs. Newsome’s bidding by meeting
					with the young girl. He realizes that although he is reporting each
					of his actions to Mrs. Newsome through letters, he did not write
					to her about his promise to Madame de Vionnet. He begins to wonder
					if he is staying as focused on his task as he could be. Just then,
					Gloriani interrupts Strether’s meeting with Jeanne, and Miss Barrace
					begins to speak to him instead. She begins to compliment Jeanne,
					but Strether asks directly, with newfound confidence, whether Madame
					de Vionnet will divorce her husband to marry Chad. Caught off-guard, Miss
					Barrace says that she assumes Madame de Vionnet will not and that
					their relationship will continue as it has been. Strether takes Miss
					Barrace’s comments as further confirmation that Madame de Vionnet
					and Chad have a virtuous relationship. Miss Barrace and Strether
					begin talking about Waymarsh.

Suddenly Madame de Vionnet appears and asks Miss Barrace
					to leave her alone with Strether. Madame de Vionnet then asks Strether if
					Miss Gostrey has been avoiding her. Confused, Strether has no answer.
					The conversation turns to Jeanne, and Madame de Vionnet gets annoyed
					when Strether will not express his opinion of the girl outright.
					After they finish talking, Strether’s eyes meet with little Bilham’s,
					and they exchange a short dialogue about the de Vionnet women. Strether
					asks Bilham why he would not want to marry Jeanne, and Bilham claims
					that he would have no chance to marry her, given the other people
					involved, including Chad. This comment convinces Strether that he
					understands the situation. He tells Bilham that, in his opinion,
					the “high fine friendship” between Chad and Madame de Vionnet has
					caused Chad to change for the better. Bilham then cautiously tells
					Strether that Madame de Vionnet perhaps cares more for Chad than
					Chad cares for her. He asks if Strether will report this to Woollett,
					and Strether says that he will not. Bilham then suggests that he
					thinks Chad might be ready to go back to America. Strether, disagreeing,
					explains that he now sees that Madame de Vionnet needs to be saved—and
					not Chad. Strether thinks that Chad must stay in Paris in order
					to help her.

The sixth book concludes the first half of The
						Ambassadors by presenting Strether and his experiences
					in almost complete opposition to how they appeared in the first
					book. The first six books form a cohesive formal unit, complete
					with a plot arc, climax, and significant character development.
					Whereas Strether once lacked confidence, he now possesses it, boldly
					asking Miss Barrace for information about whether Madame de Vionnet
					will get a divorce. Whereas Strether once relied on Miss Gostrey
					as a sounding board and fairy godmother, he now blithely gives his
					opinion of events and interactions, as when he tells Bilham that
					the virtuous relationship between Chad and Madame de Vionnet has
					caused Chad to grow as a person. Whereas he once spent his time
					checking his watch and hedging, he now moves from conversation to
					conversation almost effortlessly. Strether has grown from a hesitant
					and nervous American abroad into an expressive and content Francophile.
					Rather than report everything back to Mrs. Newsome, he now carefully
					decides what to put in his letters—and what to keep for himself.
					He has all but abandoned his original mission of bringing Chad back
					to Woollett in favor of befriending and helping Madame de Vionnet.
					The Strether of the first book probably would not recognize—or like—the
					Strether of the sixth book.

Although Strether’s allegiance shifts totally and completely
					from those in Woollett to those in Paris, the way he shows this
					allegiance has not changed. His loyalty now rests with the Parisian
					crowd, not with the folks back home. But this new allegiance depends
					on the truthfulness and trustworthiness of Bilham. Rather than questioning
					Bilham, Strether wholeheartedly accepts what Bilham says about the
					nature of the relationship between Chad and Madame de Vionnet. He
					now takes on Bilham’s worldview as easily as he once accepted the
					provincial outlook of Mrs. Newsome and the rest of Woollett. Caught
					up with his new friends, Strether believes what they tell him. For
					the moment, Strether has forgotten Miss Gostrey’s warning about
					Bilham’s trustworthiness. She pointed out early on that Bilham’s
					loyalty belongs first and foremost to Chad. Now Strether has shifted
					from favoring Mrs. Newsome and wanting to please her to favoring
					Madame de Vionnet and wanting to please her. Nevertheless,
					Strether continues to question his own thought process and motivation
					to some degree, as when he admits to himself that he has not been
					reporting everything to Mrs. Newsome. Although he has not been lying
					in his letters, he has not been exactly truthful either. This admission
					shows that Strether recognizes the changing nature of his ambassadorship:
					he will continue to help Chad but not in the way Mrs. Newsome has
					requested.

To Strether, Madame de Vionnet symbolizes Europe generally and
					Paris specifically. In the sixth book and elsewhere, the narrator refers
					to cosmopolitan Parisian women as femmes du monde,
					a French phrase meaning “women of the world.” Interestingly, Miss Gostrey
					does not fall into this category: worldly as she might be, she is
					nevertheless an American. As the novel begins, Strether believes Paris
					to be as vile as the woman with whom Chad is involved. He wants
					only to rescue Chad and return home. Upon spending time in Paris,
					however, Strether changes his mind—and he meets Chad’s lover just
					as he begins to enjoy his time in Paris. His view of her becomes
					wrapped up in his changing attitude toward Europe. In fact, the
					two become inextricably linked such that Madame de Vionnet becomes
					the human embodiment of the European city. Strether finds her charming,
					mysterious, multifaceted, intoxicating, and exotic, much as he finds
					Paris. As with the city, the woman can be many things to many people,
					depending on one’s outlook. The sixth book concludes with Strether
					telling Bilham that he wants Chad to stay in Paris, with Madame
					de Vionnet, another instance of Strether conflating the city with
					the woman.

