Mr. Galanter and Reuven arrive at Brooklyn Memorial Hospital.
					A young doctor examines Reuven, who is feeling increasingly nauseous
					and dizzy. After the doctor realizes that Reuven was wearing glasses
					when he was hit, he calls in two more doctors to look at his eye,
					including Dr. Snydman, a warm and sympathetic eye expert. After
					examining Reuven, Dr. Snydman sends him upstairs to the eye ward.
					In the elevator on the way to the ward, Reuven sees flashing lights
					and swirling colors, and soon he is unconscious.

	Reuven awakes to find himself in the hospital’s
					sunlit eye ward. His bed lies between the beds of two other patients.
					To his left is a friendly man in his mid-thirties named Tony Savo.
					Tony, a professional prizefighter, speaks using boxing metaphors,
					referring to Reuven’s head as “the old punching bag” and to his
					injury as a “clop.” To Reuven’s right is Billy, a spirited and optimistic
					blind boy aged ten or eleven. Billy explains that he lost his sight
					in a car accident, but will soon undergo an operation that will
					allow him to see again. Reuven tells Tony and Billy to call him
					Bobby, since his English name is Robert Malter. While they are talking,
					a nurse named Mrs. Carpenter brings dinner, assuring Reuven that
					all the food is kosher.

	David Malter, Reuven’s father, visits and
					informs Reuven that Dr. Snydman has operated on his eye. He assures
					Reuven that everything is all right, but Reuven realizes that his
					father is not being completely truthful. Finally, Mr. Malter reluctantly
					admits that the doctor is worried that, in the process of healing,
					scar tissue may grow over the pupil, blinding Reuven’s left eye.
					He also tells Reuven that Reb Saunders has been calling him to ask
					about Reuven’s condition. Reuven grows angry and argues that Danny intentionally
					hit him. He also tells his father that Danny called him an apikorsim.
					David Malter is shocked by Reuven’s accusations and remains critical
					of them.

	Mr. Malter informs Reuven that he cannot read at all
					until his eye has healed. He gives Reuven a portable radio, instructing
					him to remain aware of news of the War. He also brings Reuven his
					tefillin and prayer book. Throughout the conversation, David Malter looks
					sickly. Reuven, upset to see his father looking so tired and unkempt,
					reminds his father to take care of his own health. David Malter
					leaves, and Reuven falls asleep thinking about Billy, wondering
					what it is like to be blind.

Reuven’s traumatic eye injury underscores the
					importance and fragility of the eyes, an important means of connection
					to the world around us. In his closing words of Chapter 2,
					Reuven says he can’t imagine what it would be like to be blind and
					not notice any difference when opening his eyes, to find “everything
					… still dark.” Reuven’s comment alludes to the beginning of Genesis, the
					first book of the Old Testament: “In the beginning when God created
					the heavens and the earth, the earth was a formless void and darkness
					covered the face of the deep. . . . Then God said, ‘Let there be
					light’; and there was light. And God saw that the light was good;
					and God separated the light from the darkness” (Gen. 1:1–4).
					The Bible equates darkness with hopelessness, with a world without
					God. For Reuven, blindness would also be hopeless because he loves
					to read, and because reading is an important part of both prayer
					and learning. Reuven fears that without his eyesight, he will be
					closed off from the world of ideas, the world of his friends and
					family, and the world of God.

	At the same time, the fragility of Reuven’s vision and
					of the healing process implies that one’s way of seeing the world
					can be altered. Reuven’s eye injury foreshadows the coming radical
					change to his opinion of Danny. Just as Reuven’s eye heals and he
					learns to see again, so too does he eventually learn to see Danny—and
					the whole world—differently. In this chapter, vision operates on
					two levels. It is a physical ability that enables learning, prayer,
					and interaction with others, but it also represents the more abstract
					act of seeing and judging others. Both these aspects of vision are
					connected to one another, and both are important to understanding
					the novel.

	When Reuven’s father visits, we see that his and Reuven’s
					relationship is one of love, respect, and mutual concern. They worry about
					each other’s health and discuss their feeling with ease, and they
					share a strong devotion to religion. For example, David brings tefillin
					and prayer books to the hospital, so his son can stay devoted to
					his faith. At the same time, David Malter stresses Reuven’s obligation
					to care about the outside world as strongly as he cares about religion
					by bringing Reuven a radio and telling him that being hospitalized
					shouldn’t mean being shut off from the world. 

