Emma was just like any other mistress;
					and the charm of novelty, falling down slowly like a dress, exposed
					only the eternal monotony of passion, always the same forms and
					the same language.

Emma and Rodolphe become more cautious, now meeting in
					the arbor in Emma’s garden rather than at Rodolphe’s house. Rodolphe quickly
					begins to tire of her; he finds her romantic idealism exhausting
					and loses interest in her. He continues the affair solely because
					of Emma’s beauty, but he urges her to act more cautiously. His attentions
					diminish, and she becomes less sure of his love. A letter from her
					father prompts a memory of her innocent childhood days. Emma begins
					to feel guilty and tries to redeem herself through sacrifice. She
					becomes cold to Rodolphe in order to end the affair, and she tries
					to force herself to love Charles.

Homais reads a paper praising a surgical procedure that
					will cure clubfoot. Under pressure from Emma (who hopes to help
					Charles’s career), Homais, and much of Yonville, the cautious Charles
					agrees to test this procedure on Hippolyte, a clubfooted servant
					at the inn. Although Hippolyte is more agile on his crippled leg
					than some men are on two healthy ones, he is talked into the operation
					by the townspeople. The attempt makes Charles a local celebrity—but
					it fails. Hippolyte’s leg develops gangrene and must be amputated. Emma
					judges Charles incompetent and feels disgusted by him. Although
					her affair with Rodolphe has slowed down considerably, she renews
					it now with even more passion than before.

Emma and Rodolphe’s affair begins where it left off. As
					Emma’s dissatisfaction with her marriage becomes even more pronounced,
					she begins to allude to the possibility of leaving Charles. Lheureux,
					the merchant and moneylender, begins to coax her into making extravagant
					and unwise purchases. She goes into debt to buy expensive gifts
					for her lover. Rodolphe, meanwhile, becomes still more easily annoyed
					by Emma’s romantic sentimentality and begins to lose patience with
					the affair. By now, Emma has been so careless that the whole town
					knows about her adultery. When Charles’s mother comes for a visit,
					she guesses it too. She and Emma fight, and Charles convinces Emma
					to apologize to his mother about the fight. After her apology, Emma
					is humiliated and begs Rodolphe to take her away. She plans to take
					Berthe with her. With the secret hope of running away with Rodolphe,
					she becomes more polite and much less irritable with Charles and
					his mother. The lovers finalize their plans. They decide that they
					will leave Yonville separately, then meet in Rouen. However, after
					a meeting in Emma’s garden, Rodolphe talks himself out of the idea.

As the affair progresses, it becomes increasingly clear
					that Rodolphe is interested in Emma solely for the sexual pleasure
					she affords him, and that Emma’s flights of romantic fancy are sorely
					misplaced. Emma is never able to remain happy in one situation for
					long, and her guilty attempt to reclaim her moral bearing by sacrificing
					herself for Charles’s career is simply the particular form her inevitable depression
					takes at this point in the story. When Charles characteristically
					bungles the operation, having allowed Emma and Homais to talk him
					into performing an unsound procedure on the crippled Hippolyte,
					Emma rediscovers her disgust for him and returns gladly to Rodolphe’s
					arms.

	The operation on Hippolyte brings to light not only Charles’s incompetence,
					but also the real evil that pride and pretension can perpetrate
					on simplicity and innocence. Hippolyte is stupid and simple, but
					he is very able. Homais, on the other hand, is the picture of bourgeois
					pomposity. He loves to hear himself talk, regardless of the inanity
					of what he is saying. Combined with Charles’s incompetence, Homais’s
					know-it-all behavior invites the horrifying scourge of gangrene
					followed by the gruesome agony of amputation.

	The story of Hippolyte can also be seen as an allegory
					for Emma’s life. By trying to alter a mediocre marital situation,
					Emma will in the end devastate both her family and their finances—much
					as the doctors destroy Hippolyte’s leg by trying to correct a condition
					that Hippolyte had previously accepted as part of his life. The
					nature of that destruction, a long, slow poisoning by gangrene,
					is similar to the long path of increasing adultery, immorality,
					and financial irresponsibility that Emma has taken.

	By this point, the process of Emma’s moral degradation
					has already begun, in fact. Flaubert writes that Rodolphe has made Emma
					“into something at once malleable and corrupt.” Emma’s growing internal
					corruption is matched by an increased attention to superficial appearances.
					She pays excessive attention to her physical vanities, perfuming
					herself, polishing her nails, and buying expensive items from Lheureux.
					At the same time, she grows more and more brazen in her adultery,
					and her debt to Lheureux increases. Emma puts both her soul and
					her finances in hock for the sake of an illicit love affair and
					a few material possessions. Flaubert forges a strong parallel between
					Emma’s moral and financial situations. In the end, it is her financial
					situation that undoes her.

