The author and narrator of Nickel and Dimed, in which Ehrenreich investigates and reports on the plight of low-wage workers in the United States. The American journalist received a PhD in cell biology but focuses her writing on social issues and activism. In her undercover work, she uses her real name but does not reveal her education and occupation until the end of each experiment. 

The aunt of the author's friend. Caroline works in a hotel and is a generous, caring friend to Ehrenreich. Caroline’s income, when combined with her husband’s, enables them to live in a house. 

A waitress at Hearthside. She trains the author at the restaurant and talks about her own personal tragedies. Gail is generous with the customers, sharing both her own resources and the restaurant’s. When Ehrenreich leaves Key West, she arranges for the deposit on her trailer to be transferred to Gail.

A team leader at The Maids. Holly is unwell and possibly pregnant but works through the physical pain of her demanding job.

The franchise owner at The Maids. The employees seem to have an allegiance to Ted and don't want to let him down. Ted eventually gives the author a raise and attempts to convince her to say negative things about her coworkers. 

An assistant manager at Hearthside. He frequently punishes the restaurant servers and feels comfortable saying racist things about Haitian immigrants to Ehrenreich because they are both white. 

A nineteen-year-old Czech dishwasher at Hearthside. Ehrenreich tries to help George learn English. 

A hostess at Hearthside. Joan is an outspoken feminist and is known for her humorous personality. She dresses well but lives in a van and showers in a coworker’s hotel room. 

A cook at Hearthside. Billy has a temper and says derogatory things about “the female server class.” As a cook, Billy makes more money than the servers and he lives in and owns a trailer. 

An unpleasant manager at Wal-Mart. 

The office manager at The Maids. She used to be a maid herself but has managed to move up in the company.

A cook at Woodcrest Residential Facility. He claims that he is wealthy and only works at the Alzheimer's facility so that he doesn't get stir-crazy.

A cleaner at The Maids. In order to attend work, Maddy must leave her youngest child with someone she doesn’t fully trust.

She has the advantage of being married and plans to quit Wal-Mart when Ehrenreich leaves.

The supervisor at Woodcrest Residential Facility. Linda is the only example of a pleasant manager in the book.

Ehrenreich’s coworker at Wal-Mart. She can’t afford to buy a polo shirt from Wal-Mart to wear to work.

Ehrenreich’s coworker at Wal-Mart. She feels that Wal-Mart "would rather just keep hiring new people than treating the ones it has decently." 

A high-ranking cleaner at The Maids. Liza is cheerful and hard-working.

