Dr. Livesey first appears to be an ideal authority figure
				for the young Jim. Jim entrusts the treasure map to Livesey because
				Livesey is a respected, knowledgeable man. As the adventure unfolds,
				Livesey shows that Jim’s respect is merited, proving himself competent, clever,
				fair, and loyal. Livesey devises the brilliant plan of stalling
				the pirate brigade by sending Ben Gunn to give spooky imitations
				of their dead leader, Flint. He also comes up with the ruse of sending the
				pirates on the wild-goose chase to find the treasure. Livesey is not
				afraid of action and bravely fires on the pirates at the treasure site.
				He is noble in his willingness to provide medical attention to the wounded
				pirates, his enemies. He speaks tenderly to them and seems genuinely
				to care for their health. More so than the gruff Captain Smollett
				or the naïve Squire Trelawney, Livesey represents the best of the
				civilized world of men.

	Despite his credentials and valuable achievements in
				the tale, however, Livesey is simply not charismatic. He does what
				is reasonable, practical, and ethical, but never acts impetuously
				or spontaneously, as the pirates and Jim do. Livesey thinks up ingenious
				plans, but only puts them into practice if they are safe and efficient.
				He gives the pirates the treasure map only when he knows it is useless. On
				the whole, Livesey never risks anything, and therefore Jim, as we do,
				sees him as good but not grand, decent but not inspirational. It is
				significant that while Jim gives a sentimental farewell to the memory
				of Silver at the end of his narrative, he omits mention of Livesey, despite
				Livesey’s importance in the adventure. Jim does not have an emotional
				connection to Livesey, and, by extension, does not have an emotional
				connection to the decent, civilized world Livesey represents. Jim
				does not fit completely into Silver’s world, but he does not fit
				completely into Livesey’s steady, practical world either.

