The narrator again expresses his view that war is not
					scientific, repeating that the French defeat in Russia is rationally
					unexplainable. He then describes the devastation of the remaining
					French troops by Russian guerillas.

Dolokhov and Denisov are among the Cossack partisan fighters tracking
					the retreating French. Denisov receives a message delivered by Petya
					Rostov, who is now proudly serving in the army. Denisov and Petya
					come upon a French encampment and consider attacking it. Suddenly,
					they see a Russian peasant fleeing the French camp, whom Denisov
					recognizes as Tikhon, a feisty character who enjoys looting the
					French soldiers. Tikhon is sent off to capture a French informer,
					but kills the first Frenchman he finds on grounds that his clothes
					are not fancy enough. Denisov is disgusted by Tikhon’s cruelty.
					Petya, eager to please Denisov, acts kindly toward a French drummer
					boy the Russians have taken prisoner. Petya hopes to take part in
					the attack on the French camp planned for the next day, and is finally
					allowed to do so. 

Dolokhov and Petya, disguised as French officers, enter
					the French camp for information about Russian prisoners of war.
					Back at the Russian guerilla camp, Petya is unable to sleep before
					the -battle, so he goes out to speak to a Cossack who sharpens Petya’s saber.
					Petya feels as though he is in a dream. When the battle begins, the
					overjoyed Petya rides with glee into the heart of the shooting.
					He is killed.

Entering the French camp, Dolokhov and Denisov liberate
					the Russian prisoners of war, including Pierre, who had been marching painfully
					with the French while his friend Platon Karataev grew more and more
					ill. One day, Platon had told a tale of a merchant who suffered
					for the sins of others and greeted death happily. The next day,
					the French had shot Platon for being ill and straggling behind the
					rest. When Dolokhov and Denisov release Pierre, he weeps with joy.
					Petya is buried.

The French army continues to disintegrate. The troops
					fight among themselves and plunder each other. Napoleon abandons
					his subordinates. Nevertheless, Russians readers of histories of
					the war are frustrated to note that the Russian forces were unable
					to destroy the remnants of the French army. The narrator explains
					that attacking the retreating French would have been senseless,
					like whipping an animal already running.

Mary and Natasha, still in exile from Moscow, grieve Andrew’s death
					in silence and pain. Natasha is much changed, and she refuses to
					return to Moscow even when the danger is past. She receives word
					that her brother Petya is dead, and tells her mother, both weeping.
					Mary attempts to console Natasha, who grows so pale and thin that
					her father insists that she accompany Mary to Moscow to see doctors.

Unable to pursue the retreating French effectively, Kutuzov
					is accused of blundering in 1812—a view shared
					by many historians. The narrator disagrees with this opinion, considering
					Kutuzov an unsung hero. The Russian troops are in excellent spirits,
					singing and dancing despite the wretched conditions. Two exhausted
					French officers emerge from the forest, one of them Ramballe, whom
					Pierre saved earlier. The Russians give the Frenchmen food and drink.

General Kutuzov, meanwhile, goes to Vilna for rest and
					recovery. The tsar meets him and, despite criticism of Kutuzov’s
					military maneuvers, awards him the highest state honors. The tsar
					wishes to continue the war, but Kutuzov objects, citing the impossibility
					of levying fresh troops. Kutuzov is replaced as military commander, and
					later dies.

After reaching safety, Pierre falls ill for three months.
					After his recovery, he reminisces about the events of the war, including
					the deaths of Petya and Andrew. He gradually understands that he
					will no longer be ordered anywhere, that food is available, and
					that his wife and the French are no longer threats to him. He is
					no longer obsessed by questions about the meaning of life, but simply
					accepts life as its own meaning, in accordance with God’s will.
					Everyone notices that Pierre has become simpler after his ordeal.
					His estate manager informs him that the burning of Moscow has cost
					Pierre two million rubles, but that if Pierre does not rebuild,
					he could come out ahead financially. Pierre muses that loss has
					made him richer. Meanwhile, Muscovites return to their city, making
					it even more populous by 1813 than it was
					before the war. Pierre returns to his house in Moscow. He visits
					Princess Mary in her house when a lady in black is there also, and
					only after much time has passed does he realize the lady is Natasha.
					Pierre understands immediately that he loves Natasha.

Mary, Natasha, and Pierre speak of the deaths of Andrew
					and Petya, and Pierre says that faith is necessary to accept such
					losses. With Pierre present, Natasha is able to share deep feelings
					about Andrew she has never spoken of before. Pierre tells of his
					adventures in Moscow, and Mary contemplates the possibility of love
					between Natasha and Pierre. Afterward, Natasha and Mary privately
					talk about Pierre, and Mary calls him splendid and morally improved after
					his ordeal.

The next day, Pierre realizes he loves Natasha and must
					be her husband. He is full of goodwill toward everyone, and even
					finds Moscow’s ruins beautiful. Pierre goes to visit Mary and Natasha
					for dinner again, staying later than he should and telling them
					he plans to remain in Moscow. Privately, Mary tells Pierre that
					he has a chance of winning Natasha, but that it is best that he
					leave Moscow for the present. Pierre is deliriously happy. Natasha
					is likewise overcome with joy when Mary tells her what Pierre has
					said.

Tolstoy’s attitude toward the war as a Russian writer
					comes across clearly in these chapters. He attributes the final
					Russian victory over Napoleon and the withdrawal of French troops
					to Russia’s spiritual greatness, but he does not narrate with patriotism.
					However, the narrator spares no praise in describing the Muscovites
					who leave behind their possessions rather than submit to foreign
					occupation. Likewise, he praises the way in which Kutuzov leads
					his troops with Russian soulful sensitivity rather than French logic.
					Furthermore, the narrator’s portrait of Platon Karataev’s peasant
					virtues is a clear tribute to the Russian countryside. Yet Tolstoy
					does not exaggerate Russian virtues, and he also reveals to us the
					dark side of the Russian war experience. The grim episode in which
					the peasant guerilla Tikhon needlessly kills a potential French
					prisoner of war shows us the cruelty of which the Russian peasant
					is capable. By the same token, the shocking death of Petya Rostov
					reminds us that even successful wars of defense—even ones that save
					Russia—bring needless and tragic deaths. Tolstoy shows the war to
					have been useful and good, but he does not revel in it patriotically
					or uncritically.

Pierre’s reaction to the killing of Platon Karataev shows
					us the deep reserves of selfless sympathy that help define his character. Pierre
					had hardly known Platon long, but the loss is traumatic to him,
					and he is unable to bring himself to watch the shooting. The howling
					of the little dog communicates all we need to know about the devastation
					of this loss for Pierre, which affects him almost on an animal level.
					The vision of Platon returns to Pierre later during his recuperation,
					proving again his extraordinary connection with this unknown Russian
					peasant. Pierre’s ability to forge deep emotional connections with
					strangers forms a striking contrast with Napoleon, who shows no
					emotional connections even with those near him. The narrator makes
					a point of emphasizing how Napoleon took a warm fur coat for himself
					during the French retreat, riding off alone and abandoning his troops
					and officers. French individualism is portrayed in a strongly negative
					light, the opposite of the Russian tendency for warm human relations.

Natasha and Pierre’s sudden love is one of the most surprising developments
					in War and Peace. Pierre’s first wife, Helene,
					is nothing like Natasha, and he finds nothing but disappointment
					in their marriage. Natasha has been in love with several men by
					this point; her feelings toward Pierre have always been warm but
					not romantic. Yet, in another sense, this love almost seems predestined
					and inevitable. Natasha and Pierre are the two most emotionally
					sincere and profound characters in the novel, both of them displaying
					a childlike openness toward the world that neither of their earlier
					respective love interests, Andrew or Helene, had. Natasha and Pierre
					share a sensitivity and depth that make them perfect emotional matches for
					each other. Moreover, both of them have suffered enormously in the
					past year, enduring extraordinary personal losses that have forced
					them both to turn inward and reevaluate the meaning of life. They
					are both ready for a renewal, and their love is perfectly timed. The
					fact that their relationship develops under the supervision of the morally
					wise Mary gives a kind of validity and sanctity to it, a sense that
					their love has been blessed.

