Torvald embraces the belief that a man’s role in marriage
is to protect and guide his wife. He clearly enjoys the idea that
Nora needs his guidance, and he interacts with her as a father would.
He instructs her with trite, moralistic sayings, such as: “A home
that depends on loans and debt is not beautiful because it is not
free.” He is also eager to teach Nora the dance she performs at
the costume party. Torvald likes to envision himself as Nora’s savior,
asking her after the party, “[D]o you know that I’ve often wished
you were facing some terrible dangers so that I could risk life
and limb, risk everything, for your sake?”

	Although Torvald seizes the power in his relationship
with Nora and refers to her as a “girl,” it seems that Torvald is
actually the weaker and more childlike character. Dr. Rank’s explanation
for not wanting Torvald to enter his sickroom—”Torvald is so fastidious, he
cannot face up to anything ugly”—suggests that Dr. Rank feels Torvald
must be sheltered like a child from the realities of the world. Furthermore,
Torvald reveals himself to be childishly petty at times. His real
objection to working with Krogstad stems not from -deficiencies
in Krogstad’s moral character but, rather, Krogstad’s overly friendly
and familiar behavior. Torvald’s decision to fire Krogstad stems
ultimately from the fact that he feels threatened and offended by
Krogstad’s failure to pay him the proper respect.

	Torvald is very conscious of other people’s perceptions
of him and of his standing in the community. His explanation for
rejecting Nora’s request that Krogstad be kept on at the office—that
retaining Krogstad would make him “a laughing stock before the entire staff”—shows
that he prioritizes his reputation over his wife’s desires. Torvald
further demonstrates his deep need for society’s respect in his
reaction to Nora’s deception. Although he says that Nora has ruined
his happiness and will not be allowed to raise the children, he
insists that she remain in the house because his chief concern is
saving “the appearance” of their household.

Take the Analysis of Major Characters Quick Quiz

