Because you have rejected the word of
					the Lord, he has also rejected you from being king.

Israel’s next judge, Samuel, is born to Hannah, a previously
					barren woman. Hannah gives Samuel to Israel’s chief priest, Eli,
					to be raised as a Nazirite. The priesthood in Israel is in a general
					state of decline, and Eli’s sons are disobeying God’s laws. God
					declares that he will choose a new priest for Israel from outside
					Eli’s family and begins delivering messages to Samuel as a young
					man. Samuel becomes a recognized prophet throughout Israel, delivering
					God’s messages to the people.

During battle, the Philistines kill Eli’s sons and capture
					the Ark of the Covenant—Israel’s religious altar and symbol of God.
					Upon learning of the attack and robbery, Eli falls over and dies.
					The Ark is returned to Israel after it causes its Philistine captors
					to become terribly diseased. As the nation rejoices, Samuel persuades
					Israel to set aside its worship of local pagan deities, and God
					helps Israel thwart Philistine oppression for many years.

The Israelites demand that Samuel appoint a king for
					them so that Israel will be like other nations. Samuel is displeased,
					but God grants him permission to elect a king. God notes that by
					asking for a king, the people have not rejected Samuel; they have
					rejected God. Samuel warns the people that a monarchy brings certain
					drawbacks such as taxation, the conscription of armed forces, and
					the potential for tyranny, but the people are resolute.

God tells Samuel who should be king, and the following
					day, a man named Saul appears before Samuel, inquiring about some
					lost donkeys. Samuel pours oil over Saul’s head to anoint him as
					king, and God provides a series of mystical signs to assure Saul
					that he should be king. Saul, who is a head taller than the average
					man, pleases the Israelites as king and leads them in rescuing an
					Israelite outpost from invasion. Stepping down as Israel’s leader,
					Samuel encourages the people that, so long as they are obedient
					to God’s laws, God will not punish them for requesting a king.

Despite many military victories, Saul soon disobeys God.
					He tries to rush into battle by performing a ritual war sacrifice
					without the help of a priest. Later, Samuel sends Saul to fight
					the Amalekites, instructing Saul to destroy them completely and
					leave nothing alive. Saul, however, spares the Amalekite ruler and
					the best portion of their flocks, hoping to present them as sacrifices
					to God. Samuel rebukes Saul, claiming that obedience to God’s instructions
					is more important than religious sacrifice. He informs Saul that
					God will choose another man to be king of Israel. Saul pleads with
					Samuel, begging for forgiveness. Saul grabs for Samuel’s cloak,
					but the cloth tears—a symbol, says Samuel, of Saul’s broken kingdom.

God leads Samuel to the town of Bethlehem to choose a
					new king from Jesse’s family. Each of Jesse’s older sons are impressive,
					but God instructs Samuel to judge people not by their external appearances
					but, rather, by their hearts. Samuel anoints Jesse’s youngest son,
					David, a shepherd, as king, and God gives divine power to David.
					God withdraws his power from Saul, cursing Saul with psychological
					distress in the form of an “evil spirit” (16:14).
					David begins his rise to courtly status as a harp-player for Saul
					during the king’s emotional unrest.

The Philistines again threaten to attack Israel, this
					time taunting Israel with their new hero, Goliath—a giant more than
					nine feet tall. Saul and the Israelites tremble in fear, but David,
					arriving to deliver food to his brothers, offers to fight the giant.
					Refusing the king’s armor, David publicly invokes God’s help and
					kills Goliath with a single stone shot from his sling. The Israelites
					attack the retreating Philistines, and Israel returns home to the
					sound of women singing praises of David’s victory.

Saul is insanely jealous of David, who becomes an intimate
					friend of Saul’s son, Jonathan, and leads the Israelite troops to
					many more victories. After attempting to kill David with a spear,
					Saul sends David on a suicide mission to kill a hundred Philistine
					men and bring back their circumcised foreskins. David succeeds,
					and Saul grudgingly rewards David with his daughter Michal’s hand
					in marriage. Saul orders his household to kill David, but, with
					the help of Michal and Jonathan, David flees from Saul. David builds
					an army of unhappy and impoverished Israelites, and he is joined
					by a priest who is also fleeing from Saul’s destructive path.

Saul pursues David into the desert where David spares
					the king’s life twice. While Saul is urinating in a cave, David
					sneaks up behind him and cuts off a corner of Saul’s robe, scorning
					the opportunity to kill God’s “annointed” ruler (24:6).
					At night, David and his men sneak into the king’s tent and steal
					Saul’s spear while he is sleeping. On both occasions, David announces
					his deed to Saul, and Saul expresses remorse both times, begging
					for David’s mercy.

Still, Saul continues his pursuit, and David
					takes refuge with the Philistines, who show mercy to the great warrior
					and adversary of Israel’s king. Preparing to fight the Philistines,
					Saul is wracked with fear and consults a witch, bidding the spirit
					medium to conjure up the dead spirit of Samuel. Samuel’s ghost angrily
					warns Saul that he and his sons will die fighting the Philistines,
					ensuring the demise of Saul’s kingdom. David and his men head out
					to fight the Amalekites, and David succeeds in destroying the warring
					nation. In the meantime, Saul leads Israel into a losing battle
					with the Philistines, and Saul’s sons, including Jonathan, are killed.
					Saul commands his armor-bearer to kill him, but the boy refuses,
					and Saul falls on his own sword and dies.

The first book of Samuel tells the story of Israel’s
					transition from a theocracy, or state ruled by a religious leader,
					to a monarchy, or state ruled by a political leader. Israel starts
					out as a nation of loosely affiliated tribes led by priests and
					religious heroes, but it becomes a nation-state led by a centralized
					king. Each stage of this transition is depicted through the narrative’s
					three main figures: Samuel represents the old rule of the judges,
					Saul represents Israel’s failed attempt at monarchy, and David represents
					God’s ideal king. Although it seems logical that the rule of a single
					king would bring a sense of unity and cohesiveness to Israel, the
					opposite is the case. The move away from religious leaders divides
					religious and political life in Israel. Confusion about how religion
					and politics ought to relate to one another is the chief source
					of conflict in Samuel. Indeed, Saul’s gravest mistake as king is
					his attempt to carry out the sacrificial duties of the priesthood—a
					role that Samuel explicitly denies the political ruler.

God’s ambivalence regarding the monarchy escalates
					this conflict. On the one hand, God and Samuel are displeased at
					Israel’s demand for a king, because, as God claims, this demand
					represents Israel’s refusal to believe that God and his religious
					laws are adequate to rule the people. On the other hand, God willingly
					chooses Saul to be king, identifying Saul as the deliverer of his
					people. God reconciles this contradiction by distinguishing Israel’s
					status as a human institution from its status as a divine one. As
					Samuel’s warnings to Israel about the dangers of having a king suggest,
					God may bless the king, but he will not keep the king from committing
					the sorts of human errors and injustices that human rulers are prone
					to commit.

Saul’s demise as king is tragic because he makes such
					small, human mistakes. Like all tragic heroes, Saul possesses a
					fatal flaw: he is more concerned with earthly objects and human
					customs than with spiritual or religious matters. Saul’s plan to
					present the plunder from the Amalekites as a sacrifice to God earns
					Samuel’s criticism because Saul mistakes a human custom for religious
					devotion. This criticism is symbolized by the piece of cloth that
					Saul is left with when he grabs at Samuel. The cloth, like all things
					Saul considers important, is man-made. The war song of the Israelite
					women, which ignites Saul’s fury, further highlights Saul’s flaw:
					“Saul has killed his thousands, / and David his ten thousands” (18:7).
					The refrain, which is repeated throughout the Book of Samuel by
					both priests and Philistines, illustrates the fact that Saul evaluates
					his leadership by human standards, rather than religious standards.

In contrast, God favors David because David places a
					higher value on religious devotion than on the physical world. David’s inner
					virtue is Samuel’s criterion for anointing him as king, and the encounter
					with Goliath functions as a parable for the triumph of the spiritual
					over the physical. The giant, a symbol of brute human force, is
					defeated by the diminutive David, who refuses the physical protection
					of the king’s armor in favor of prayer, calling down God’s wrath
					on the irreverent Goliath. David’s repudiation of the physical world
					continues in his willingness to roam the desert on the margins of
					Israel, denying the opportunity to take the throne by physical force
					from God’s current anointed ruler. Like Abraham and Moses, David
					reinforces God’s ongoing preference for the unseen over the seen,
					the lesser over the greater, and inner faith over external circumstances.
					A commitment to these preferences seems to be the minimum religious
					requirement for the ideal Israelite monarch.

