Inert, worn dull by years of routine and six-day work
				weeks, Byron Bunch lives in a detached and insulated world designed
				around the avoidance of entanglement—personal, emotional, or otherwise. When
				Lena arrives at the mill in Jefferson, her plight triggers an instinct
				in Byron to reach out and to engage, finally, the life of another.
				There is no doubt that Byron is a good man: he lives an honest,
				upstanding life and directs the choir at a rural church each Sunday,
				returning for the start of his shift the following morning. But
				it is a sanitized, hollow goodness, achieved through inaction and
				a regimented life free of any temptation or challenge. He has lived
				a moral life by avoiding rather than engaging the world around him.
				His growing attachment to Lena parallels a gradual awakening in
				Byron as he attempts to turn from the man he once was—the man who
				has protected himself too stringently from experiencing pain, sorrow,
				or conflict.

Bunch’s friendship with Hightower not only providers a
				much-needed source of inspiration and challenge to Byron but also
				adds a new layer of moral and philosophical complexity to his life.
				Byron turns to his friend for counsel and wisdom and in turn is
				able to reveal his own desires and intentions through his dialogues
				with the defrocked minister. Hightower casts doubt on the purity
				of Byron’s sentiments in reaching out to selflessly help Lena and
				questions his supposed disinterest or lack of ulterior motive in
				improving her situation. Byron is forced to resolve his feelings
				for Lena—confronting both public opinion and his own selfishness—to
				conclude, in the end, that he is an honorable man who has chosen
				to live a more fully engaged and fully present life. Byron’s willingness
				to fight Joe Brown, to be beaten by the larger man, is the visceral
				reawakening that he needs. It reveals finally his resolve to be
				involved in the life of another and his willingness to risk personal
				injury. Byron is determined to stand by Lena and deal with the conflicting
				emotions and vulnerabilities that he experiences in loving another.
				In the end, Byron may still have much to learn when it comes to
				courting and caring for Lena, but he has at last found a freedom
				and a purpose to his life hitherto avoided or ignored.

