[Godfrey] was not likely to be very penetrating
						in his judgments, but he had always had a sense that his father’s
						indulgence had not been kindness, and had had a vague longing for
						some discipline that would have checked his own errant weakness
						and helped his better will.

Godfrey takes his own breakfast early and waits for Squire
					Cass to eat and take his morning walk before speaking with him.
					Godfrey tells his father about Wildfire and about how he gave the
					rent money to Dunsey. His father flies into one of his rages and
					asks why Godfrey stole from him and lied to him for Dunsey’s sake.
					When Godfrey is evasive, the Squire comes close to guessing the
					truth. The Squire goes on and on, blaming his current financial
					troubles on the overindulgence of his sons. Godfrey insists that
					he has always been willing to help with the management of his father’s
					estate, but the Squire changes the subject, complaining about Godfrey’s
					waffling over whether to marry Nancy Lammeter. The Squire offers
					to propose for Godfrey, but Godfrey is again evasive and refuses
					the offer. Afterward, Godfrey is not sure whether to be grateful
					that nothing seems to have changed or uneasy that he has had to
					tell more half-truths. Though Godfrey worries that his father might
					push his hand and force him to refuse Nancy, as usual, he merely
					places his trust in “Favourable Chance,” hoping that some unforeseen
					event will rescue him from his predicament.

Weeks pass with no new evidence about the robbery and
					no sign of Dunsey. No one connects Dunsey’s disappearance with the
					theft, however, and the peddler remains the primary suspect, though
					some still insist that an inexplicable otherworldly force is responsible. Silas
					is still inconsolable, and passes the days weaving joylessly. Without
					his money, his life feels empty and purposeless. He earns the pity
					of the villagers, who now think of him as helpless rather than dangerous.
					They bring Silas food, call on him to offer condolences, and try
					to help him get over his loss. These efforts are only mildly successful.
					Mr. Macey subjects Silas to a long and discursive speech about coming
					to church, among other things, but gets little reaction and leaves
					more perplexed by Silas than before.

	Another visitor is Dolly Winthrop, the wheelwright’s
					wife, a selfless and patient woman. Dolly brings her son Aaron and
					some of her famed lard-cakes. She encourages Silas to attend church,
					particularly since it is Christmastime. When she asks if he has
					ever been to church, Silas responds that he has not; he has only
					been to chapel. Dolly does not understand the distinction Silas
					is making—nor, in any significant way, does Silas. Wanting to show
					his gratitude for the visit, all Silas can think to do is offer
					Aaron a bit of lard-cake. Aaron is frightened of Silas, but Dolly
					coaxes him into singing a Christmas carol. Despite his gratitude,
					Silas is relieved after the two have left and he is alone to weave
					and mourn the loss of his money.

	Silas does not go to church on Christmas Day, but almost
					everyone else in town does. The Casses hold a family Christmas party
					that night, and invite the Kimbles, Godfrey’s aunt and uncle. All
					evening Godfrey looks forward longingly to the Squire’s famed New
					Year’s dance and the chance to be with Nancy. The prospect of Dunsey’s return
					looms over Godfrey, but he tries to ignore it.

Though Eliot has already described Squire Cass’s parties,
					house, and temper tantrums, Godfrey’s confrontation with his father
					is the first time we actually encounter the “greatest man in Raveloe.”
					He is not, we soon discover, “great” in any real sense. The Squire
					is complacent, lazy, arrogant, and not particularly bright, having
					spent his life—merely by good fortune of birth—as the biggest fish
					in a very small pond. He does not have as much money as he once
					did and has spoiled his sons—not, it seems, out of affection, but
					simply out of neglect. The Squire is the only role model Godfrey
					has had while growing up, and Godfrey’s shortcomings can be seen
					as stemming at least in part from his father’s.

	Chapter 10 returns us to Silas’s
					domestic existence, and we see that he is overwhelmed by the void
					the robbery has left in his life. Though his life before the theft
					might have appeared empty and sad, it was nonetheless “an eager
					life, filled with immediate purpose that fenced him in from the
					wide, cheerless unknown.” Likewise, though Silas’s money was, according
					to the narrator, a “dead disrupted thing,” it nonetheless had given
					him purpose in life and satisfied his need for connection and meaning.
					Now, however, Silas is broken and utterly defenseless in the face
					of an outside world that he long ago rejected as corrupt and uncaring.
					Once again, his most valued possession has been taken from him.

	Like her earlier comparison of Silas to a budding plant,
					Eliot’s imagery in this chapter gives us hope for Silas’s recovery.
					The progression of imagery Eliot uses is largely drawn from nature.
					Silas initially clings to his money as to the roots of a plant,
					and now is confused like “a plodding ant when the earth has broken
					away on its homeward path.” Finally, Eliot foreshadows a metaphor
					she uses later: Silas is “still the shrunken rivulet, with only
					this difference, that its little groove of sand was blocked up,
					and it wandered confusedly against dark obstruction.” The three
					phenomena to which Silas is compared in these metaphors share a
					common aspect of recovery and self-righting. The roots of the plant
					will regrow in new soil, the ant will find its way, and the dammed
					stream will rise with water until it flows over its obstruction.

	Dolly Winthrop provides a simple, compelling portrait
					of religious faith. Like the philosophical fumblings of the Rainbow’s
					denizens, the “simple Raveloe theology” that Dolly professes to
					Silas is something at which a seminarian might scoff. Dolly is illiterate
					and thus does not even understand the words of some of the Christmas carols
					she so loves. Nonetheless, Dolly’s description of her faith is eloquent
					in its own way. By placing her faith in “Them as are above us” while
					at the same time demanding that “we’n done our part,” Dolly holds
					to a distinctly community-oriented faith. For Dolly, faith in God
					provides not only an incentive to do good works herself, but also
					a trust that others in the community will do their part.

	Dolly’s beliefs contrast markedly with the “Favourable
					Chance” relied upon by Godfrey and other men “who follow their own devices
					instead of obeying a law they believe in.” In Dolly’s Christianity,
					the requirement of action goes a long way toward fulfilling the
					expectations of faith. Godfrey’s faith, while perhaps more sophisticated
					than Dolly’s, seems far more futile.

