As spring blossoms, so does the love between Marius and
					Cosette. Their bliss is almost dreamlike, but Valjean shatters their
					happiness when he announces that he plans to take Cosette to England
					in a week’s time. Valjean is quite sure that their house is being
					watched and has seen Thénardier loitering around the neighborhood.
					Just as Valjean suspects, Thénardier is indeed plotting revenge
					and robbery, but Eponine manages to delay her father’s plans. Valjean’s
					desire to leave Paris is clearly motivated by a fear of losing Cosette,
					but it also stems from his unease about the deteriorating political
					stability in France.

When Cosette tells Marius about Valjean’s plan, he is
					heartbroken. He goes to see Gillenormand, and although they have
					not yet reconciled, Marius begs his grandfather to grant him permission
					to marry Cosette. As they talk, Marius and Gillenormand begin to repair
					their relationship, but Gillenormand then makes the unfortunate
					suggestion that Marius make Cosette his mistress rather than marry
					her. Marius explodes, screaming that his grandfather has insulted
					his future wife and storms out of the house.

Marius returns to the house in Saint-Germain to see Cosette.
					When she fails to appear at the appointed time, Marius realizes
					that Cosette and Valjean have moved. Heartbroken, he has no time
					to grieve, since a mysterious voice advises him to join his friends
					on the barricades.

Paris is in the throes of a cholera epidemic, and the
					climate is so unstable that the slightest spark threatens to set
					off an insurrection. The spark finally comes on June 5, 1832,
					during the funeral procession of General Lamarque, a popular defender
					of liberty and the people. Fearing that the public mourning might
					lead to violence, the monarchy dispatches troops throughout Paris
					to maintain control. When shots are fired on the Austerlitz Bridge,
					the city explodes and barricades begin to spring up.

Marius’s former law-school companions, the Friends of
					the ABC, are among the first to answer the cries of revolution.
					The group begins to arm and prepare for the imminent confrontation
					with the army. Gavroche joins their ranks. As the mob marches through
					the streets, the old churchwarden Mabeuf joins them, following them doggedly
					even after they tell him to go home.

The students decide to build a barricade around one of
					their favorite meeting spots, the Corinth wine-shop. Gavroche is
					instrumental in building the barricade and organizing its defense.
					The revolutionaries build barricades from everyday items, and they
					are in high spirits as night falls. Gavroche tries in vain to persuade
					the men to give him a gun. When the construction of the barricades
					is done, the men sit and wait. Gavroche suddenly realizes that an
					unnamed man who has joined the group is actually Javert, who is
					spying on them for the army. The men take Javert prisoner. One drunken
					revolutionary shoots a local homeowner, and Enjolras executes the
					man on the spot. Enjolras delivers a rousing speech. Marius’s roommate,
					Courfeyrac, notices that a slim, young laborer who came looking
					for Marius earlier in the day has joined the group at the barricades.

Mad with grief and eager to die, Marius takes the two
					pistols that Javert gives him earlier and heads toward the center
					of Paris. He walks toward the barricades like a man already dead.

The government troops arrive and shoot down the revolutionary flag.
					Mabeuf climbs over the barricade to raise the flag once again, but
					the army shoots him dead. The students condemn Javert to death,
					but they keep him alive in the hopes of exchanging him for a revolutionary
					that the army is holding hostage. When they hear this revolutionary
					being executed, Enjolras decides that they will execute Javert ten
					minutes before the barricade falls. The soldiers attack the barricade
					and Marius shows up just in time to save Courfeyrac and Gavroche.
					Marius drives away the troops by threatening to blow up the barricade.

The fighting quickly becomes chaotic and Marius just barely avoids
					being killed. The mysterious young laborer, who is Eponine in disguise,
					saves Marius’s life by throwing herself in front of a soldier’s
					rifle. Eponine crawls toward Marius and confesses her love to him.
					She hands Marius a letter from Cosette and dies. After kissing Eponine’s
					lifeless face, Marius reads the letter, in which Cosette reveals
					her whereabouts. Marius writes Cosette a letter telling her he will
					die on the barricades and bidding her farewell. Marius sends Gavroche
					to deliver the news.

Gavroche runs through the streets with Marius’s letter.
					Valjean intercepts the boy and says that he will deliver the letter
					to Cosette himself. Gavroche is scornful at first, then feels sympathy
					for the old man and gives him the letter. Valjean asks Gavroche
					where the barricade is. The boy answers and runs off into the night.
					When Valjean reads the letter, he at first rejoices that Marius
					will soon cease to be a threat to his happiness. Valjean’s decency
					soon takes over, however, and, dressed as a member of the National
					Guard, he heads toward the barricade.

Though she is a Thénardier and has a criminal record,
					Eponine emerges in this section as one of the most virtuous figures
					in the novel. Her love for Marius leads her to serve as a messenger
					between Marius and her rival, Cosette, and she takes this thankless
					task further when she helps protect Cosette. Eponine tries to divert
					Patron-Minette’s attention away from Valjean’s house, putting her
					own safety at risk when she threatens to wake up the whole neighborhood
					if Thénardier and his cronies break into the house. Likewise, Eponine
					urges Valjean to move away when she becomes aware that her father
					is planning another attack. Ultimately, her love for Marius results
					in her death when she throws herself in front of a rifle to save
					him. Eponine, who grows up in the unloving environment of the Thénardier
					household, is a tragic figure. The fact that the daughter of a couple
					as despicable as the Thénardiers is capable of such love and selflessness
					implies that anyone—regardless of his or her upbringing or social
					status—can rise above terrible circumstances and become virtuous.

Marius’s failed reconciliation with his grandfather highlights
					the social prejudices that Hugo sought to combat by writing Les
						Misérables. Upon hearing that Marius wants to marry a girl
					who possesses neither a dowry nor any apparent income, Gillenormand suggests
					that an affair might be more appropriate than marriage. In his mind,
					lower-class women have nothing to offer other than their bodies,
					and he advises Marius accordingly. Though offensive, Gillenormand’s
					suggestion might seem harmless if it were not for the fact that
					it reminds us of Tholomyès’s behavior. Tholomyès, Cosette’s father,
					is an upper-class student who holds the same cavalier views toward
					lower-class women as Gillenormand does, and his behavior has disastrous
					effects for the women with whom he is involved. Tholomyès’s affair
					with Fantine, for example, starts her on the road to prostitution
					and incarceration. Marius’s horrified response to his grandfather’s
					suggestion distinguishes Marius as a man of honor and gives us some
					faith in the morals of upper-class students. Gillenormand’s proposal
					reveals the callous attitude of the upper class toward the working
					poor and shows us that Tholomyès’s behavior would have been applauded
					and condoned by the other men in his upper-class world.

While Hugo’s sympathies lie with the revolutionaries,
					he is too disgusted with bloodshed to portray the insurrection as
					a glorious moment in French history. He shows us small acts of heroism,
					such as Mabeuf’s attempt to rescue the flag, but he primarily portrays
					the barricade as a place of unnecessary brutality and pointless
					violence. Enjolras’s execution of one of his own men for killing
					a civilian is justifiable, but it makes us wonder whether even the
					most principled violence might inevitably lead to murder and mayhem
					of the worst kind. In contrast to the example Enjolras and his men
					set, Valjean avoids killing anyone, even his most bitter enemy.
					Hugo suggests that revolution does not have to involve violence
					and that the only truly revolutionary weapons are forgiveness and
					kindness.

