Valjean finds an out-of-the-way place where he and Cosette
					can live —a rundown tenement called the Gorbeau House. Valjean tells
					the landlady that Cosette is his granddaughter. He soon acquires
					a reputation in the neighborhood for philanthropy, and because his
					own clothes are so shoddy, the locals call him the “beggar who gives alms.”
					One day, Valjean stops to give a beggar some money and is petrified
					when he sees what he thinks is Javert’s face peering out from under
					the beggar’s hood. Valjean has heard rumors that the beggar is a
					police spy, but he assures himself that he is imagining things.

The next night, Valjean hears the sound of unfamiliar
					footsteps coming up the stairs of his tenement. He tells Cosette
					to keep absolutely silent and stays up all night waiting for the
					person outside their apartment to leave. Toward daybreak, Valjean
					hears someone heading back downstairs. Valjean peers through the
					keyhole and sees the unmistakable figure of Javert. Later that morning,
					the landlady asks Valjean if he heard anyone come in during the
					previous evening. Valjean replies that he heard footsteps, and the
					landlady tells him it was probably the new tenant, a man named Dumont. Valjean
					begins to worry that the landlady is spying on him for Javert. He
					resolves to leave the Gorbeau House as quickly as possible.

Valjean hurriedly packs all of his and Cosette’s belongings
					and they rush out of the apartment as soon as it is dark. Valjean
					senses that they are being followed and sees Javert and two other
					policemen close behind them. With Cosette in his arms, Valjean runs
					across the eastern quarters of Paris for hours, but he is unable
					to shake Javert completely. After crossing the river Seine on the
					Austerlitz Bridge, Valjean is confident that he is finally free.
					He soon sees, however, that Javert is still close behind and that
					the number of men with him has grown.

Without hesitation, Valjean rushes down a dark alleyway,
					only to realize that it is a dead end. Peering around the corner
					of the alley, he sees that Javert has commandeered a passing patrol
					and that they are at most fifteen minutes away from finding him.
					Desperate, Valjean decides to draw on his old talent for climbing,
					a skill that he mastered as a convict. To persuade Cosette to go
					along with his desperate plan, he tells her that the Thénardiers
					are after them. By a stroke of luck, he finds a length of rope attached
					to a nearby lamppost. He cuts the rope down and attaches it to Cosette.
					Valjean expertly scales the steep wall at the end of the alley and
					then pulls Cosette up to him. They find a way down from the wall
					just as Javert and his men enter the dark alley.

Valjean and Cosette find themselves in a vast, dark garden.
					They hear music and drop thankfully to their knees in prayer. A
					man approaches them with a bell clanging softly against his leg.
					Surprised, Valjean offers the man one hundred francs to let them
					spend the night in his lodgings. By incredible coincidence, the
					man is Fauchelevent, whom Valjean rescued from underneath a carriage
					in Montreuil. Fauchelevent addresses Valjean as M. Madeleine and declines
					his one hundred francs, remembering that Valjean once saved his
					life and found him a job. Fauchelevent tells Valjean that he and
					Cosette are in the garden of the convent of Petit-Picpus. He offers
					them a place to stay for the night. Valjean accepts, and they quickly
					move Cosette inside, out of the cold.

Book Five concludes with an explanation of how Javert
					manages to track down Valjean. Like the rest of the world, Javert
					thinks that Valjean died after his fall from the Orion, but
					the news of Cosette’s kidnapping from the Thénardiers arouses his
					interest. The Thénardiers, anxious to hide their own crimes, say
					Cosette was retrieved by her grandfather. Their answer initially
					puts Javert’s mind at ease, but when he hears the anecdotes about
					a “beggar who gives alms,” he becomes suspicious again. After a
					brief investigation, Javert realizes that this man is really Valjean.
					He lies in wait on the night that Valjean flees the Gorbeau House,
					but he is so thrilled by the idea of hunting down Valjean that he
					intentionally toys with him and gives him time to get away. After
					carefully searching the area, Javert returns to police headquarters
					frustrated and ashamed.




Valjean and Cosette’s escape from the Gorbeau House begins
					a pattern of relocation and flight that continues throughout the
					novel, revealing how French society can make it difficult to find
					a home. Valjean and Cosette’s constant movement reflects the advantages and
					pitfalls of the fluid social structure of the nineteenth-century city;
					while it is easy for them to disappear, it is difficult for them
					to settle down. Their neighbors are always strangers, which means that
					they can easily hide their troubled pasts, but it also means that these
					neighbors cannot be counted on for friendship and help when the
					truth about Valjean and his past comes out. Nor can Valjean or Cosette
					turn to their family for help, since the structure of poor families
					in nineteenth-century France is so loose and casual that neither of
					them knows where his or her surviving family members are. In a city
					that guarantees anonymity, Valjean and Cosette can depend only on
					each other. This is one of Hugo’s sharpest criticisms of Parisian
					society, an environment whose families are dissolved and neighbors
					are only friendly if they are spies for the police.

Valjean and Cosette’s flight from the Gorbeau House is
					motivated partly by Valjean’s concern for Cosette. Although he has
					made many escape attempts before, this is the first time his flight
					is motivated by something greater than his simple instinct for self-preservation.
					Valjean recognizes that if he is caught, Cosette will most likely spend
					the rest of her childhood in the same kind of orphanages in which
					Fantine grew up and will lose any opportunity to improve her circumstances.
					Cosette’s presence therefore adds a degree of legitimacy and urgency
					to Valjean’s escape. We have already come to appreciate Valjean
					as a person, but now that his fate is tied up with Cosette’s, we
					become even more concerned that his escape be successful.

The reappearance of Fauchelevent in the convent garden
					emphasizes the positive effects of good deeds. Fauchelevent’s sudden appearance
					is so implausibly convenient, but Hugo is willing to sacrifice realism
					to show that good things happen to good people in times of need.
					Valjean’s kindness thus far has brought him only trouble—his rescue
					of Fauchelevent raises Javert’s initial suspicions, and the money
					Valjean gives the poor starts so much gossip that it leads Javert
					back to his trail. Now, however, Valjean’s courageous rescue of
					Fauchelevent pays off when Valjean most needs help. With these turns
					of fate, Hugo encourages us to recognize the worth of helping others,
					even when doing so seems more trouble than it is worth. In return,
					Hugo suggests,we can expect the help of others during our own personal
					crises.

In Book Five, Javert’s determination to recapture Valjean
					has become obsessive and maniacal, and his quest appears cruel and absurd.
					We see that even Javert is aware of the obsessive nature of his
					preoccupation with Valjean, since he keeps his suspicions to himself
					for fear that his colleagues will think him mad. Javert’s manic
					determination to hunt down Valjean contradicts his claim that he
					is trying merely to uphold the law. His obsession with Valjean has
					clearly become a personal vendetta. Javert has always seen Valjean’s
					prosperity as an affront to society and now sees Valjean’s ability
					to escape from seemingly impossible situations as an affront to
					his own skills as a police officer. On a symbolic level, Valjean’s ability
					to evade the police suggests that some higher force does not want
					Javert to capture Valjean—a notion that infuriates the uncompromising
					and logical Javert.

The inhumanity of Javert’s persecution of Valjean is
					underscored by his lack of concern for Cosette. When Javert hears
					that an old man has kidnapped a girl from Montfermeil, he pursues
					the case not to ensure the girl’s welfare but merely to track down
					his nemesis. Javert does not even inquire about the wretched conditions
					that Cosette endured under the Thénardiers. We sense that, given
					the chance, he would probably return the girl to their care. Javert’s
					narrow-minded investigation into Cosette’s alleged kidnapping further undermines
					his claim that he only wishes to uphold the law. By this point,
					it is apparent that Javert’s only motive is to punish Valjean to the
					full extent of the law.

