“Luck never gives: it only lends.”

The girls hang out in Carmen’s bedroom, discussing their
					imminent departures. None of them has finished packing. Tibby yells
					at everyone for talking about packing and trying to make her feel
					better. She spots the Pants on Carmen’s dresser and asks if she
					can have them. Tibby tries them on, and they fit perfectly. The
					Pants also fit Lena, who is stunningly beautiful; Bridget, who is
					athletic and tall; and Carmen, who has fuller thighs and a rounder
					butt than her friends. The girls decide the Pants are magic.

In honor of the Pants and their upcoming separation, they
					go to Gilda’s, the gymnasium where their mothers met years ago.
					Once they get in, they light candles and sit in a circle with the
					Pants in the middle. Carmen gives a speech, claiming that they all
					own the Pants and that they will send them to one another during
					the summer. They take a “vow of the Traveling Pants” and call themselves
					“Sisters of the Pants.” They write down rules for the Pants and
					decide each person should keep the Pants for two weeks. They all
					feel giddy.

“Today is the tomorrow we worried about
						yesterday.”

When Tibby was twelve, she felt sorry for her guinea pig,
					Mimi, for having to stay in her cage all day. Other times, she envied
					Mimi, who didn’t have to face the world. Heading to her summer job
					at Wallman’s, a superstore, Tibby envies Mimi. As she rides her
					bike to work, her crush, Tucker Rowe, sees her in her hideous Wallman’s smock.
					She sends a letter to Bridget in which she includes a small piece
					cut from the smock.

At soccer camp, Bridget finds her cabin and asks her new
					cabin mates if they want to swim. When they decline, she goes alone,
					feeling happy. At dinner, she meets a few other girls. Later, she
					sleeps on the beach with two girls named Diana and Jo.

On the plane to South Carolina, Carmen admires the orderliness of
					the plane snacks and puts an apple in her bag. She imagines her father’s
					apartment, which she’s never seen, and decides that it’ll be messy
					and undecorated. She fantasizes about him asking her to move to
					South Carolina permanently. Her parents divorced when she was seven,
					and Carmen sees her dad only at Christmastime and a few other times
					during the year. Carmen writes a letter to Tibby, telling her she
					misses her.

Before the girls separate for the summer, they stage an
					elaborate ritual with the Pants, which also serves as a kind of
					formal goodbye ceremony. The girls have never been apart for the
					summer, and the prospect of so much time on their own makes them
					uneasy. By gathering at Gilda’s, they are acknowledging the strength
					of their friendship, which has a lot of history behind it. Their
					ceremony reaffirms their friendship, and they vow to keep in touch
					regularly throughout the summer, despite the large distances between
					them. By agreeing to send the Pants to one another, they guarantee
					that the bonds between them will not be broken. The Pants ceremony
					also gives them a secret to take with them to their far-flung destinations.
					They will be surrounded by new people in new places this summer,
					but the fact that they share the secret of the Pants strengthens
					their friendship. No one else will know about the Pants. It is a
					funny, magical thing that only the four of them will understand.

As the girls enter their new lives, we begin to learn
					more about what makes them unique and what they like most about
					one another. Tibby’s artistic spirit shines through when she brings
					her video camera to the Pants ceremony, and we see her self-consciousness
					when she refuses to wear her work smock while she rides her bike
					to work. Lena is self-conscious as well, aware of how her beauty
					sets her apart from her friends. She is reluctant to draw attention
					to it. Bridget is fearless and outgoing, making overtures of friendship
					immediately to the girls at camp—and not minding when she has to
					do something alone. She enjoys being in the moment and doesn’t spend
					too much time analyzing her feelings. When her new friend Diana
					tries to figure out how looking at the stars makes her feel, Bridget
					is reminded of Carmen, the more introspective of the group. For
					her part, Carmen enjoys the unknown, and she happily imagines what
					her father’s home will be like. However, at the core of Carmen is
					a desire for order and clarity. She imagines her father’s home,
					but she immediately lists the things she’ll do to make it fit her image
					of “home,” which includes curtains and a tea kettle. She likes the
					organized tray of plane snacks and takes part of it with her as
					a kind of protection against the unknown she is about to face.

