It doesn’t matter anymore. Just do the
						best you can. But it won’t matter.	

A maid lets Grant into the Pichot kitchen through the
					back door. She informs him that Mr. Pichot’s brother-in-law, sheriff
					Sam Guidry, will arrive soon. Grant waits in the kitchen, thinking
					moodily about his role in Jefferson’s affairs. After half an hour,
					Grant hears Sam Guidry and his wife Edna arrive at the front door.
					After another half hour, Edna enters the kitchen. She asks him many
					questions, but never gives him an opportunity to answer. She drinks
					bourbon and she says she feels sorry about Jefferson and the murder.
					After another hour and fifteen minutes, Sheriff Sam Guidry, Henri
					Pichot, Louis Rougon, and a fat man walk into the kitchen. Guidry
					asks Grant how long he has been waiting, and Grant tells him flatly, “About
					two and a half hours.” Grant realizes he should have grinned and
					said, “Not long,” but his anger and pride prevented him from being
					submissive. Guidry asks what Grant wants to do with Jefferson, and
					Grant politely answers that he does not know. After a while,
					the sheriff informs him that he can see Jefferson in a few weeks,
					although he thinks Grant’s efforts will fail and Grant should let Jefferson
					die a “contented hog.” Moreover, the sheriff says that Grant will
					lose his visiting privileges if he “aggravates” Jefferson.

During the next few weeks, Grant awaits the annual visit
					by the superintendent of schools. He makes sure that his students
					appear clean and well behaved, since the superintendent could arrive
					at any moment. When the superintendent, Dr. Joseph Morgan, finally arrives,
					Grant notes Dr. Morgan’s heaviness and the difficulty with which
					he gets out of his car. Grant escorts Dr. Morgan to his own desk
					and then stands with his class. Dr. Morgan calls up several of the
					boys and girls, choosing the most obviously self-conscious or problematic
					students. He checks their teeth and asks them to recite Bible verses.
					He is angry yet vindicated when one young boy fails to recite his
					lessons properly. Grant thinks of the similarity between Dr. Morgan’s
					inspection and slave masters’ inspections. Dr. Morgan lectures the
					class on the virtues of good nutrition, hygiene, and physical labor,
					but compliments Grant on his class. Grant complains to the superintendent
					that most of the school’s shabby books are hand-me-downs from white
					schools. This grievance annoys the superintendent, who says that
					white schools struggle too. Before leaving, Dr. Morgan suggests
					that Grant put the children to work in the fields to earn money.

The next week, the school receives its first load of wood
					for the winter. As Grant’s students saw and chop the wood, Grant
					recalls his own elementary school days and his teacher Matthew Antoine.
					A bitter, defeated man, Mr. Antoine hated teaching and hated his
					students. Grant calls Mr. Antoine a mulatto, referring to Antoine’s mixed
					race. Because he was a mulatto, Mr. Antoine considered himself superior
					to blacks and felt contempt for black people who wished to learn
					in a society that thinks them subhuman. After Grant studied at a
					university for several years, he returned to the plantation to teach
					in the school. He went to visit Mr. Antoine, who advised Grant to
					do his best but did not think Grant could help the situation. According
					to Mr. Antoine, blacks had but one option in the South: to run away.

In these chapters, Gaines illustrates the racism that
					plagues Grant. Sheriff Guidry agrees to let Grant visit Jefferson,
					but in warning Grant against aggravating Jefferson, Guidry denies
					Grant the right to elicit an emotional response from Jefferson.
					Guidry wishes Jefferson to remain meek and without convictions.
					Grant’s school operates at the mercy of the racist white community,
					receiving basic supplies like chalk, books, and firewood at the
					whim of the whites. Dr. Joseph sees the black children as physical
					laborers and implies blacks should be working in the fields as they
					did when they were slaves. He compliments Grant’s class by calling
					it a “good crop”—racist language that suggests Dr. Joseph thinks
					of the students as objects, not people. Dr. Joseph insists on the
					importance of hygiene, but Grant notes the poor health of whites;
					Edna drinks, a fat man grunts like a hog, and Dr. Joseph himself,
					who insists upon physical exercise for the black children, is so
					fat he can hardly get into his car.

	While he notes the blatant examples of white racism,
					Gaines also delves into the murky areas where stereotypes begin
					to dissolve. While Grant despises Dr. Joseph for believing that
					black children should grow up to work on white plantations, Grant
					observes that the two men who bring the wood to the school truly
					enjoy themselves while performing their work. He also sees how much
					the children enjoy physical labor, chopping and sawing the wood.
					He gets frustrated when he watches them, and he wonders, “Am I reaching them
					at all? They are acting exactly as the old men . . . who never attended
					school a day in their lives. Is it just a vicious circle?” He worries
					that blacks are so used to their chains, they have come to like
					them. Going along with the whites is easier than fighting them, and
					the children’s enjoyment of the physical work makes compliance still
					easier. 

Gaines suggests that racism is particularly difficult
					to root out when it comes cloaked in kindness. Edna Guidry feels
					empathy and goodwill for Grant, but she treats him as her inferior.
					She asks him questions but answers them herself. She makes observations
					about his life and the lives of his friends without letting him
					make his own observations. Edna acts out the role that she learned to
					play. Moreover, in emphasizing Edna’s reliance upon bourbon, Gaines
					implies that alcohol plays a part in preventing Edna from truly
					showing compassion for Grant, or other black people, for that matter.
					Alcohol also plays a role in Grant’s inability to change.

	Professor Antoine, for all his cynical condemnation of
					whites, plays a role in propagating racism. Since he has white blood,
					he feels superior to black people, and he stayed in the South because
					he enjoyed this feeling of superiority. Antoine says mulattoes hate blacks
					because mulattoes know whites have the most financial and social
					worth and want to associate themselves with whites. The more white
					blood in a person, the higher he stands on the rungs of the social
					ladder. In order to deny their blackness, Antoine says, mulattoes
					avoid working with blacks. Antoine’s is a self-hating ethos.

	Grant’s inner conflict stems from his experiences in
					education, including his exposure to the cynical Antoine. Inspired
					by years of study, Grant wants to make great changes in his hometown.
					Grant’s behavior defies stereotype, but in order to live, he must
					follow certain rules that make his small moments of defiance futile.
					The losing battle between small rebellions and survival becomes
					clear in Grant’s conversation with Guidry. Grant takes pride in
					flouting Guidry’s racist expectations by using grammatical English
					and maintaining his poise, but then he feels he has been “too clever”
					and adopts a humble demeanor. Like the nameless black narrator
					in Ralph Ellison’s Invisible Man, Grant, no matter
					how much he asserts himself, can control only the superficialities
					of his life. He can use grammatical English and get an education,
					but the wrath of society would descend on him if he did something
					truly to step out of line. 

