Fantine develops a chronic chest ailment. As her condition
					worsens, Madeleine continues to care for her. Madeleine also sends
					money to the Thénardiers, but they realize that it would be more
					profitable for them to hold on to Cosette, so they refuse to send
					her to Fantine. Madeleine plans to retrieve Cosette, but his plan
					is derailed when Javert visits him and demands to be fired. Javert
					tells Madeleine that he has long suspected him of being Valjean
					and that he denounced Madeleine after the mayor ordered Fantine’s
					release. Javert claims that he has since discovered that Valjean,
					pretending to be a man named Champmathieu, has just been rearrested
					for robbery and is standing trial in the town of Arras. Javert claims
					that he has positively identified Champmathieu as Valjean and that
					he is leaving for Arras to testify in the trial the following day.
					Madeleine pretends to be unconcerned and refuses to relieve Javert
					of his duties.

Madeleine, who is Valjean in disguise, is faced with the
					agonizing decision of whether to turn himself in. If he reveals
					his true identity, the innocent Champmathieu will be freed, but
					Valjean will no longer be able to help the poor people of Montreuil-sur-mer.
					Valjean decides to stay and burns any clothes and personal effects
					that could prove his true identity. When he sees the coin he stole
					from Petit Gervais, however, Valjean recalls the promise he made
					to Myriel to become an honest man. After agonizing for the whole
					night, Valjean finally gives in to his conscience and decides to
					go to the trial in Arras.

A number of mishaps delay Madeleine, and by the time he
					arrives in Arras he is convinced that he is too late. A guard tries
					to stop Madeleine from entering the courtroom, but his fame and
					widespread respect precede him, and he enters the courtroom through
					a secret door reserved for honored guests. To Madeleine’s horror,
					he discovers that Champmathieu does resemble him but that the man
					is not smart enough to defend himself properly. Javert has already given
					his testimony, and three of Valjean’s former prison mates swear
					that Champmathieu is in fact Valjean. Just as Champmathieu is about
					to be convicted, Madeleine interrupts the trial and reveals that
					he is Valjean.

The court exonerates Champmathieu. In the confusion that
					ensues, Valjean has time to return to Montreuil-sur-mer and help
					Fantine. Javert appears, visibly excited by the prospect of arresting
					Valjean. Valjean begs Javert to go and retrieve Cosette from the
					Thénardiers, but Javert only laughs at him. Fantine, horrified by
					the news that her daughter is not yet in Montreuil, dies of shock.
					Valjean angrily breaks free from Javert’s grasp, blaming him for
					Fantine’s death. He whispers something in Fantine’s ear. Later that
					night, Valjean breaks out of jail and returns home to organize his
					affairs. He leaves his fortune to the poor and heads for Paris.
					Fantine is buried in a public grave.

Valjean ’s decision to reveal his identity is an agonizing
					one, since he knows that both admission and concealment will have
					huge consequences. Hugo appropriately titles the chapter in which
					Valjean makes his decision “A Tempest within a Brain,” revealing
					how torturous this choice is. The two perspectives argue with each
					other within Valjean’s mind, and he hears so many different voices
					that the chapter almost feels like a bout of schizophrenia. Valjean’s desire
					to exonerate Champmathieu is laudable, but doing so would be, in
					his thinking, an act of egotism: since the entire town has come to
					depend on Valjean’s business and philanthropy, he would be abandoning
					many people who count on him if he turned himself in to satisfy
					his own guilt. On the other hand, Valjean’s belief that the needs
					of many outweigh the needs of the few conflicts with the promise
					he makes to Myriel. 

Though Hugo spends time exploring Valjean’s heart-wrenching dilemma,
					Hugo’s main objective in this section is to critique the French
					criminal-justice system. We have already seen Myriel criticize capital
					punishment and the failure of incarceration to rehabilitate convicts.
					Hugo now takes this critique a step further by attacking the credibility
					of the courts. Valjean publicly denounces the prisons for turning
					average men into hardened criminals, and Champmathieu’s trial is
					an absurdity that calls into question the validity of the entire
					court. The prosecution’s case depends upon the statements of four
					unreliable witnesses—three convicts and Javert, who is too obsessed
					with catching Valjean to be objective. The prosecution is too clumsy
					to convict Champmathieu for his original crime of stealing apples.
					The only reason the trial proceeds is because Champmathieu is not
					smart enough to defend himself or understand what is going on. Hugo
					describes the walls of the courtroom as dirty and stained, a symbol
					of the corrupt court system. Champmathieu’s trial compares unfavorably
					to Valjean’s own deliberations of the night before, which were far
					more tortuous but also fundamentally more decent and honest. 

