Beowulf exemplifies the traits of the perfect hero. The
				poem explores his heroism in two separate phases—youth and age—and through
				three separate and increasingly difficult conflicts—with Grendel,
				Grendel’s mother, and the dragon. Although we can view these three
				encounters as expressions of the heroic code, there is perhaps a
				clearer division between Beowulf’s youthful heroism as an unfettered
				warrior and his mature heroism as a reliable king. These two phases
				of his life, separated by fifty years, correspond to two different
				models of virtue, and much of the moral reflection in the story
				centers on differentiating these two models and on showing how Beowulf
				makes the transition from one to the other.

In his youth, Beowulf is a great warrior, characterized
				predominantly by his feats of strength and courage, including his
				fabled swimming match against Breca. He also perfectly embodies
				the manners and values dictated by the Germanic heroic code, including loyalty,
				courtesy, and pride. His defeat of Grendel and Grendel’s mother
				validates his reputation for bravery and establishes him fully as
				a hero. In first part of the poem, Beowulf matures little, as he
				possesses heroic qualities in abundance from the start. Having purged Denmark
				of its plagues and established himself as a hero, however, he is
				ready to enter into a new phase of his life. Hrothgar, who becomes
				a mentor and father figure to the young warrior, begins to deliver
				advice about how to act as a wise ruler. Though Beowulf does not
				become king for many years, his exemplary career as a warrior has
				served in part to prepare him for his ascension to the throne.

The second part of the story, set in Geatland, skips over
				the middle of Beowulf’s career and focuses on the very end of his
				life. Through a series of retrospectives, however, we recover much
				of what happens during this gap and therefore are able to see how Beowulf
				comports himself as both a warrior and a king. The period following
				Hygelac’s death is an important transitional moment for Beowulf.
				Instead of rushing for the throne himself, as Hrothulf does in Denmark,
				he supports Hygelac’s son, the rightful heir. With this gesture
				of loyalty and respect for the throne, he proves himself worthy
				of kingship.

In the final episode—the encounter with the dragon—the
				poet reflects further on how the responsibilities of a king, who
				must act for the good of the people and not just for his own glory,
				differ from those of the heroic warrior. In light of these meditations,
				Beowulf’s moral status becomes somewhat ambiguous at the poem’s
				end. Though he is deservedly celebrated as a great hero and leader,
				his last courageous fight is also somewhat rash. The poem suggests
				that, by sacrificing himself, Beowulf unnecessarily leaves his people
				without a king, exposing them to danger from other tribes. To understand
				Beowulf’s death strictly as a personal failure, however, is to neglect
				the overwhelming emphasis given to fate in this last portion of
				the poem. The conflict with the dragon has an aura of inevitability
				about it. Rather than a conscious choice, the battle can also be interpreted
				as a matter in which Beowulf has very little choice or free will
				at all. Additionally, it is hard to blame him for acting according to
				the dictates of his warrior culture.

