Anne continues to keep busy by studying French, math,
					history, and shorthand. She writes that she is getting along with
					her mother and Margot better. The two sisters agree to let each
					other read their diaries. Anne asks Margot what she wants to be
					when she grows up, but Margot is mysterious about it.

	Anne and the others in the annex have a scare when a
					carpenter comes to fill the fire extinguishers without advanced
					warning. They hear someone banging on the bookcase and they think
					the carpenter is going to discover them, but then they realize it
					is Mr. Kleiman, a man who helped them hide, trying to move the door
					since it is stuck. Miep Gies, a worker in Mr. Frank’s office, spends
					a night in the annex along with her husband, Jan. Anne enjoys having
					the visitors around.

Later in the week, Mr. Frank becomes ill, but the family
					cannot call a doctor. That weekend, Bep Voskuijl, another worker
					in Mr. Frank’s office, stays in the annex. Anne writes that she
					is very excited because she thinks she is about to get her period.
					In a note she adds to this section in 1944,
					Anne writes that she cannot believe her “childish innocence” from
					that time, and she calls her descriptions “indelicate.” She also
					mentions how the whole time she has been in hiding she has longed
					for “trust, love and physical affection.”

	Anne reports on some of the British successes in Africa
					and puzzles over Churchill’s famous quotation about the war being
					at “the end of the beginning.” Mr. Frank recovers from his illness,
					and Peter turns sixteen. The residents of the annex also agree to
					take in an eighth person, and Anne is very excited at the prospect
					of a new addition.

	The newcomer is Albert Dussel, a dentist who is married
					to a Christian woman. Mr. Dussel is excited when Miep tells him
					of the hiding place, but he asks for a few extra days to put his
					accounts in order and treat some patients. Mr. Dussel meets Mr.
					Kleiman at an appointed time, and Miep then leads him to the annex.
					Mr. Dussel is surprised to see the Frank family because he had heard
					they were in Belgium. 

The van Daans give Mr. Dussel a tongue-in-cheek list of
					rules upon his arrival. He shares a room with Anne and tells her
					about the atrocities committed outside, including the murders of
					women and children. Anne thinks that they are lucky to be in hiding,
					and she thinks of the suffering her friends must endure merely because
					they are Jewish. Anne writes that she is very upset by the news,
					but she resolves that she cannot spend all her time crying. The
					loneliness of the attic makes her unhappy.

In this section we see Anne’s strength in the face of
					mounting fears. Anne begins to worry more about an intrusion into
					the annex, but nonetheless continues to detail the day-to-day changes
					in her emotions and passes the time with her studies. For the first
					time, Anne writes about feeling closer to Margot, but we do not
					get a good idea of Margot’s character. Margot does not share Anne’s
					plans for the future, which suggests that she is afraid she will
					not have a future at all.

	Anne does not make any overt attempt to get to know the
					other members of the annex, except for Peter. This may seem odd
					considering the confined nature of the annex. However, social and
					familial structures of the 1940s
					were often formal and inhibited personal intimacy between generations
					or with people outside the family. In addition, since Anne is going
					through puberty, she is understandably more focused on what is going
					on in her own life and does not necessarily have a strong enough
					sense of self to engage deeply with the adults. Furthermore, the
					group’s stressful living conditions put everyone on edge, making
					them less inclined to open up in a meaningful way. Many of the residents
					seem to guard their inner thoughts from even their close family
					members.

	For Anne, the early excitement of being in hiding gives
					way to frustration at being trapped in such close quarters with
					the van Daans and her own family. Mr. Dussel’s arrival is initially
					exciting for Anne because it brings a change in a life that has
					little variety. However, this sense of excitement is soured when
					Mr. Dussel tells Anne about the persecution of Jews in the outside
					world. Anne begins to express her inability to understand the injustice
					of persecution and genocide. For Anne, the probable deaths of her
					friends and acquaintances are still abstract in her mind and have
					not yet become real. She knows rationally what is happening outside
					of the annex, but the relative security of the hiding place allows
					her to escape the harsh realities of the war and retain some of
					her childhood innocence.





