Charlie Bucket is the protagonist of Charlie and
					the Chocolate Factory, and he is the embodiment of all
				that is virtuous. He is deprived of adequate food, a bed, and any
				privacy. In spite of all this, he never complains, nor does he ever
				accept charity from his family when it comes at their own expense.
				Each morning, Charlie musters the strength to walk to school, even
				though he nearly freezes during the colder months. And each night,
				he returns home and dutifully spends time with his bedridden grandparents,
				a chore that he seems to genuinely enjoy.

Charlie’s physical proportions align with his personality:
				not only is he quite small and undernourished, but also he is meek.
				He speaks only when he is spoken to. He never asks for more than
				he is given. He looks forward to the one time a year, on his birthday, when
				he can indulge in a Wonka chocolate bar, and instead of wolfing
				it down all at once, he savors it (bite by bite) for many months. Charlie
				walks past the world-renowned Wonka chocolate factory twice a day,
				yet this never causes him bitterness or anger. Instead, Charlie
				simply indulges in the savory smells coming out of the factory and
				humbly dreams of entering the factory one day. When the golden tickets
				start turning up in the hands of nasty, greedy children, Charlie
				never complains about how unfair it is that he will never get to
				go. Charlie’s strongest criticism of one of the other children comes
				when he hears that Veruca’s father is using all the workers in his
				peanut factory to unwrap chocolate bars night and day until his daughter
				gets a ticket. Charlie’s only comment is that Veruca’s father is
				not playing quite fair.

Behind Charlie’s meek and virtuous exterior lies an inner strength
				and courage. He faces the new challenges and mysteries of the factory
				with the same bravery he employs to overcome the adversity of his
				everyday life. He finds all of the adventures in the chocolate factory
				to be wild and stimulating. While other characters cringe at the
				speed of the boat as it tears down the chocolate river, Charlie
				demurely embraces it, clutching to Grandpa Joe’s legs for stability
				and enjoying the ride of his life.

