A comic writer concludes when his characters reach the happiest of states; a
					tragic writer concludes when his characters descend to the most wretched of
					states. If this were a tragedy, the narrator's work would be finished. He
					provides a possible tragic ending: Sophia could be given in marriage to
					Blifil or Fellamar, and Jones could be hanged at Tyburn. The ancient
					writers had the benefit of bringing Divine Intervention to their assistance in
					saving their characters; he has to rely on natural methods. Jones still has
					worse news to face.

Blifil finds Allworthy and Mrs. Miller at breakfast and tells them that
					Tom is a villain. Mrs. Miller vehemently stands up for Tom, surprising
					Allworthy, who tells her not to treat Blifil so rudely. Mrs. Miller says that
					although she has to acknowledge that Tom has faults, they are merely the "Faults
					of Wildness and of Youth." She promises to tell Allworthy stories of Tom's
					humanity and generosity. Blifil now recounts that Tom has killed a man. Mrs.
					Miller argues that Tom must have been provoked. A visitor arrives for Allworthy.

Squire Western arrives in Mrs. Miller's kitchen and tells the company about
					Mrs. Western's plan for Sophia to marry Lord Fellamar. Allworthy has to
					translate Western's dialect. After listening to Western's speech, Allworthy
					strongly discourages Western from forcing Sophia into any marriage. Western
					bellows that he begat Sophia and thus has a right to govern her. Blifil begs
					that he may be allowed to persevere with Sophia. Allworthy is concerned that he
					is pursuing Sophia out of lust rather than love and encourages Blifil to examine
					his heart. When Blifil alludes to the fact that Tom has committed a "murder,"
					Western sings and dances about the room in joy. The narrator promises to return
					to Sophia's story, since he "can no longer bear to be absent" from her.

The narrator compares Sophia, pursued now by Lord Fellamar as well as by Blifil,
					to a hunted doe. Mrs. Western threatens to take Sophia back to her father if she
					does not agree to meet with Fellamar.

Sophia tells her aunt that Fellamar attempted to violate her—the proof of
					which she still has on her left breast. Mrs. Western is horrified—no man
					has ever treated a woman of the Western family in such a way before. Sophia
					reminds her aunt that she herself has turned down many suitors. Sophia wants to
					know why she cannot do the same. This sets Mrs. Western boasting of her love
					"conquests" and "cruelty" for half an hour. Mrs. Western's mood improves to the
					point that she agrees that some distance between Sophia and Fellamar is
					appropriate.

Mrs. Miller, Nightingale, and Partridge—the most faithful of
					friends—visit Jones in jail. Partridge announces the happy news that
					Fitzpatrick has not died. Relief washes over Jones—until he begins to
					think of the helpless situation with Sophia. Mrs. Miller, who has learned about
					Sophia from Partridge, offers to speak to Sophia on behalf of Jones. Tom thus
					entrusts a letter for Sophia with Mrs. Miller, who has already been "so warm an
					Advocate to Mr. Allworthy" on account of Tom. Nightingale promises to
					investigate Fitzpatrick's state of health, and to discover who else was at the
					duel.

Sophia and Mrs. Western have been on great terms since Sophia allowed her aunt
					to brag about her ex-suitors. Sophia may thus admit whomever she pleases to the
					house. She permits Mrs. Miller to visit her, but when she sees that Mrs. Miller
					has a letter from Tom, she refuses to accept it. Mrs. Miller falls to her knees
					and tells Sophia the stories of Tom's goodwill to Mr. Anderson and to her
					daughter Nancy. She surprises Sophia with her vehemence on Tom's behalf.
					Sophia says that since she cannot prevail over Mrs. Miller, she will have to
					accept the letter. She opens it as soon as Mrs. Miller leaves the room. In his
					letter Tom says that he can account for the marriage proposal to Lady Bellaston
					and that he did not wish to marry her at all. However, he does not provide any
					details in his letter that mollify her anger towards him. Sophia is obliged to
					attend a party with Lady Bellaston and her aunt that evening, at which she
					struggles to maintain a cheerful countenance.

Mrs. Miller tells Allworthy about her many obligations to Tom. Allworthy accepts
					that even the worst villains have some goodness in them, but he begs her never
					to mention Tom's name to him. Moreover, he resents the fact that Mrs. Miller
					compares Blfil unfavorably to Tom. Mrs. Miller, however, cannot say enough about
					Tom's beauty, goodness, and generosity. Allworthy is moved by her speech, but
					changes the topic of conversation to Nancy. He visits Nightingale's father to
					try to reconcile him to the family. Blifil and the lawyer Dowling arrive.
					Blifil, greatly pleased with his new friend, has made Dowling his steward.

Mrs. Western's good spirits continue, but she has not abandoned her plan for
					Sophia to marry Fellamar. She is further encouraged by Lady Bellaston, who
					argues that most marriages are arranged. Sophia agrees to a visit from Fellamar,
					who showers her with compliments and professions of love. Sophia asks him how he
					can reconcile such sentiments with his violent behavior to her in the past. He
					pleads madness from love. Sophia says that if he truly wishes to attune himself
					to her happiness, he should leave. He asks whether she has another
					suitor—she retorts that it is not her responsibility to tell him. A
					flushed Mrs. Western enters the room and begins to chide Sophia for her "silly
					Country Notions of Bashfulness."

Mrs. Western's fury stems from more than one reason: her new maid, warned by
					Mrs. Honour to keep a close eye on Sophia, has told Mrs. Western all about
					Sophia's conversations with Mrs. Miller. Sophia refuses to hand over the letter
					that Mrs. Miller brought her from Tom, and Mrs. Western threatens to evict
					Sophia from her house and take her back to Squire Western's house.

Jones has spent twenty-four hours alone in prison before Partridge and
					Nightingale return. Nightingale has tracked down two of the men who claim to
					have witnessed the start of the duel. He bears bad news: both of the men say
					that they saw Tom provoke the fight. Mrs. Miller arrives with news of Mrs.
					Western's rebuff. Once his friends have left, Jones receives a surprise visit
					from Mrs. Waters. The narrator updates the reader on all that has happened since
					Tom parted with Mrs. Waters at the inn at Upton: Fitzpatrick courted her in
					the coach on the way to Bath, where they were married. He did not tell her that
					he was already married. When Mrs. Waters learned that the man who wounded her
					husband was none other than Jones, she decided to visit him in prison. Mrs.
					Waters tells Tom that Fitzpatrick is beyond danger of dying and that he has
					admitted to initiating the duel. This information improves Jones's spirits
					dramatically. He suffers, however, over the thought that Sophia has abandoned
					him.

In Chapter I, the narrator forecast that he would raise the novel to its
					highest pitch by the end of Book XVII. He reminds us of his own artifice and
					authority by suggesting that, if he were a tragic writer, he could end the novel
					after Book XVI with Tom's death by hanging and Sophia's marriage to
					either Blifil or Lord Fellamar. From Chapter II of Book XVII onward,
					however, the narrator begins to fulfill his promise of bringing resolution to
					what had previously seemed an irresolvable situation.

This is the beginning of Fielding's version of "Virtue Rewarded" the alternate
					name for Samuel Richardson's novel, Pamela, which defines virtue as
					chastity. Tom's generosity to his friends in the past now means that they return
					his loyalty and friendship—Partridge visits Tom constantly in jail,
					Nightingale discovers the eyewitnesses to the duel, and Mrs. Miller
					undertakes to effect a reunion between Tom and Sophia. Characters are
					distinguished at this point by their loyalty or their lack of
					loyalty—while Tom's friends support him, Mrs. Honour betrays Sophia.
				

