Byron gets caught lighting matches in the house, and Momma warns him that if he does it again, she will burn him. Less than a week later, Kenny hears Byron lock the bathroom door, and Kenny becomes suspicious. Kenny watches through the keyhole as Byron pretends to make a movie called Nazi Parachutes Attack America and Get Shot Down over the Flint River by Captain Byron Watson and His Flamethrower of Death. Byron has made small toilet paper parachutes that he lights on fire before dropping them into the toilet and flushing them.

Momma runs up the stairs and shoves the door open. She drags Byron downstairs by the neck and throws him on the couch. After Kenny and Joey are unwilling to fetch matches from the kitchen, Momma retrieves matches, a band aid and Vaseline. Joey starts crying because she does not want Byron to get burned. Momma explains that she swore to God that she would burn Byron, even though she does not want to hurt him. Byron is terrified and cries as Momma holds him down and brings a match close to his fingers. Joey spits on the match. After several more attempts, Momma gets tired of Joey spitting on her hand and leaves Byron to be punished by Dad.

Momma tells Kenny and Byron to go to the store to pick up groceries. She tells them that they do not have to pay, but just sign for the groceries. Byron asks if they are on welfare. Momma tells him that they are not, but it would not matter if they were. At the store, Byron makes Kenny wait in line to sign, thinking that other people will see that they are on welfare. When Kenny tells the cashier that he needs to sign for the groceries, the cashier explains it to Kenny. Instead of paying each trip to the grocery store, Kenny’s dad just pays at the end of the week. Kenny and Byron are relieved to not be on welfare.

A week later, a cookie almost hits Kenny while he is walking. Byron is in a tree, throwing frosted cookies at him. Kenny goes closer and Byron offers him cookies, which makes Kenny suspicious. After eating a few Swedish Creme cookies, Kenny realizes that Byron bought the cookies by signing for them. Byron tells Kenny that he cannot tell Momma because Kenny has also eaten the cookies. Having already eaten an entire bag of cookies, Byron starts throwing the remaining cookies at a bird nearby. One of the cookies connects and kills the bird. Byron goes to investigate and immediately throws up. Byron yells at Kenny and throws rotten apples at him until he leaves. Kenny is confused at how Byron can be so mean but feel bad about killing the bird. Later, when Kenny returns, there is a grave marking where the bird fell.

In these chapters, Byron’s continued bad behavior and the Watsons’ subsequent reaction further emphasize the theme of family. When Byron gets in trouble for playing with fire again, Momma’s attempt to burn his finger to teach him a lesson and keep him safe illustrates how Byron’s behavior affects the whole family and how his parents’ frustration and concern is growing. Joey’s response, which prevents Momma from carrying out her plan, speaks once again to the strength of the family bond and the siblings’ desire to protect one another. This family bond is also the focus of Chapter 6, when Byron shares his ill-gotten Swedish Creme cookies with Kenny and accidentally kills the dove. The fact that Byron becomes physically ill when he realizes the bird is dead and then digs a grave and makes a cross for it initially confuses Kenny, but also implies to him that his brother does indeed have a conscience. The death of the dove, which is often a symbol of peace, foreshadows the struggles and unrest the Watsons will face as a family later in the novel.

Chapter 6 demonstrates that although the Watsons don’t have a lot of money, the children do not think of themselves as poor. Byron and Kenny’s intense shame at being told to sign for groceries instead of paying for them with cash highlights both their lack of understanding of what it means to be poor or “on welfare” as well as their judgment of people who are. This judgment is further underscored by their relief at finding out the list isn’t actually about welfare but is a convenience that allows Dad to pay for everything at once at the end of the week. The boys’ lack of understanding is further highlighted by Byron’s story about their parents “sneaking” them welfare cheese or making milk from a powder. These stories provide more evidence that while the Watson family has what they need, they also have to stretch to make ends meet sometimes.

