The narrator introduces Emma to us by emphasizing her
				good fortune: “handsome, clever, and rich, with a comfortable home
				and happy disposition,” Emma “had lived nearly twenty-one years
				in the world with very little to distress or vex her.” But, the
				narrator warns us, Emma possesses “the power of having rather too
				much her own way, and a disposition to think a little too well of
				herself.” Emma’s stubbornness and vanity produce many of the novel’s
				conflicts, as Emma struggles to develop emotionally.

	Emma makes three major mistakes. First, she attempts
				to make Harriet into the wife of a gentleman, when Harriet’s social
				position dictates that she would be better suited to the farmer
				who loves her. Then, she flirts with Frank Churchill even though
				she does not care for him, making unfair comments about Jane Fairfax
				along the way. Most important, she does not realize that, rather
				than being committed to staying single (as she always claims), she
				is in love with and wants to marry Mr. Knightley. Though these mistakes
				seriously threaten Harriet’s happiness, cause Emma embarrassment,
				and create obstacles to Emma’s own achievement of true love, none
				of them has lasting consequences. Throughout the novel, Knightley
				corrects and guides Emma; in marrying Knightley, Emma signals that
				her judgment has aligned with his.

	Austen predicted that Emma would be “a character whom
				no one but me will much like.” Though most of Austen’s readers have proven
				her wrong, her narration creates many ambiguities. The novel is
				narrated using free indirect discourse, which means that, although
				the all-knowing narrator speaks in the third person, she often relates
				things from Emma’s point of view and describes things in language
				we might imagine Emma using. This style of narration creates a complex
				mixture of sympathy with Emma and ironic judgment on her behavior.
				It is not always clear when we are to share Emma’s perceptions and
				when we are to see through them. Nor do we know how harshly Austen
				expects us to judge Emma’s behavior. Though this narrative strategy
				creates problems of interpretation for the reader, it makes Emma
				a richly multidimensional character.

	Emma does not have one specific foil, but the implicit
				distinctions made between her and the other women in the novel offer
				us a context within which to evaluate her character. Jane is similar
				to Emma in most ways, but she does not have Emma’s financial independence,
				so her difficulties underscore Emma’s privileged nature. Mrs. Elton,
				like Emma, is independent and imposes her will upon her friends,
				but her crudeness and vanity reinforce our sense of Emma’s refinement
				and fundamentally good heart. Emma’s sister, Isabella, is stereo-typically
				feminine—soft-hearted, completely devoted to her family, dependent,
				and not terribly bright. The novel implicitly prefers Emma’s independence
				and cleverness to her sister’s more traditional deportment, although
				we are still faced with the paradox that though Emma is clever,
				she is almost always mistaken.

