Alex’s torture continues the following day. This time,
					the screenings aren’t nearly as violent, but somehow, Alex feels
					the pain more acutely. During one film, a German movie from World
					War II, Alex recognizes the soundtrack as Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony.
					Alex cries out in agony for them to stop, calling it “a filthy unforgivable sin.”
					Branom and Brodsky don’t stop the film, but once it’s finished, they
					puzzle over Alex’s reaction and the significance of the music, since
					this is the only time Alex has vomited during his treatment. Brodsky
					knows little of music other than its usefulness in heightening emotions. 

Brodsky informs Alex that the treatment involves an application of
					the theory of associative learning. By making Alex feel ill while
					he views violent films, the doctors force Alex to associate sickness
					with violence. Alex finally realizes that the needles, which he
					had thought were vitamin supplements, are actually responsible for
					his illness. He becomes angry, but soon changes his tactics, assuring
					the doctors that he has learned his lesson and that he now understands
					the consequences of evil and is ready to reject it. This assertion
					only produces more laughter and a pat on the shoulder. 

As the treatment progresses, Alex loses count of the days.
					He tries to rebel once, smacking a needle from the nurse’s hand,
					but that only results in a minor beating and a new needle. Another
					day, Alex devises a plan to preempt his torture session by knocking
					himself unconscious, but can’t even think about banging his head
					against the wall without becoming sick and exhausted. Finally, one
					morning, the nurse doesn’t show up at his room. Instead, the man
					who wheels Alex to treatment steps in and tells him that they will
					walk to the screening room together. During the session, the doctors
					restrain Alex with the usual straps and clips, but don’t attach
					any wires to him. This provides conclusive evidence to Alex that
					the headaches, thirst, and nausea he experiences are actually a
					reaction to the films, not the wires. Alex’s realization brings
					him to tears. The attendants arrive at his side instantly, drying
					his eyes so that he can continue watching the screen. The film,
					which depicts Jews being gassed to death, only makes him cry again. 

That night, Alex decides to attempt an escape. He proceeds
					to bang on his door and call for a doctor, all the while planning
					to catch the orderly unawares, knock him out, and slip away. When
					his chance comes, however, Alex pauses with his fists raised in
					the air, staggered with nausea. The orderly understands the situation
					immediately, and taunts Alex before punching him in the face. Left
					alone in his pain, Alex realizes that it’s better to receive a blow
					than to deal one. 

In A Clockwork Orange, the principles
					of behaviorism are used to support Ludovico’s Technique, a new,
					cutting-edge technology that allows the State to convert otherwise-incorrigible
					criminals into reliably law-abiding citizens. In Burgess’s own time,
					behavioral science was a relatively new field, one whose practitioners
					considered themselves highly sensitive to issues of ethics. Many
					behaviorists saw their profession as a chance to redesign society
					based on universally benevolent principles, but Burgess had a distinctly
					less idealistic attitude toward the nascent discipline. Reform may
					qualify as an admirable sentiment, but in these chapters, we witness
					as behaviorism is used to justify the hijacking of Alex’s free will
					and the reduction of his moral choices to a set of predictable outcomes.
					Burgess creates Ludovico’s Technique in the fictional world of A
						Clockwork Orange in order to interrogate the ethical implications
					of behaviorism in his own world. The examination of contemporary
					concerns through a fantastic, imaginary fiction is the defining
					element of dystopian science fiction. 

Not only does the application of aversion theory rid Alex
					of his attraction to violence, it also has the unintended consequence
					of eliminating his ability to enjoy music. Ludovico’s Technique
					may be an effective instrument, but it also seems to be a blunt
					and problematic one. Ludovico’s Technique doesn’t make any distinction between
					Alex’s aesthetic pleasure and its own so-called moral concern: since
					music, like violence, prompts an instinctual response in Alex, it
					too becomes susceptible. In behaviorism, this unintended transference
					is known a “false positive,” the incidental stimulation of a secondary
					sense that shares some of the same faculties with the impulse being
					tested. Brodsky is aware of the phenomenon, but the consequences
					don’t faze him. Ludovico’s Technique is predicated on the notion
					that the criminal impulse can be isolated and eliminated, but Brodsky
					himself admits that human psychology remains more complicated and
					that the removal of violent tendencies runs the risk of extinguishing
					other, more benign inclinations.

The contamination of music for Alex represents a particularly tragic
					loss, since music has been the only thing that engages him in a higher
					sense of being. Music is, in Burgess’s words, “a figure of celestial
					bliss,” a sentiment that Alex would obviously agree with, as he labels
					the doctors’ incorporation of Beethoven into his aversion therapy
					“a filthy unforgivable sin.” Significantly, Alex has never used
					the specifically theological word sin to describe
					an offense perpetrated against him—not when his friends betrayed
					him, not when the police beat him, not even when a cellmate tried
					to molest him. While Ludovico’s Technique, by taking away Alex’s
					free will, has already removed his identity as a human being created
					by God—or, as the chaplain put it earlier, taken Alex “beyond the
					reach of the power of prayer”—this loss of divinity finds its most
					acute expression in the loss of Alex’s beloved music. Hearing Beethoven’s
					Fifth, Alex vomits for the first time, suggesting that this represents
					a crucial moment in Alex’s conditioning. Alex rejects the treatment
					verbally, decrying its humanity, as well as physically. This moment
					finds an echo in Part Three, when Alex attempts suicide: impelled
					by music, Alex will throw himself from a window. 

