Dinah begins traveling with Rachel as she performs her
					duties as a midwife. A messenger arrives at their camp from the
					city of Shechem. One of the king’s concubines has gone into labor
					and has called Rachel and her assistant to come aid with the birth.
					Excitedly, Dinah packs. When she first arrives in Shechem, Dinah
					finds the city to be crowded and dirty, but she finds the interior
					of the palace to be quiet and spacious. They find the young mother-to-be
					already panting. The king’s wife, Queen Re-nefer, enters and introduces
					herself. She is beautiful and elegant and shows herself to be knowledgeable about
					childbirth. Dinah hears a man’s voice in the adjoining room and
					goes to investigate. She comes across Shalem, the prince of Shechem
					and Re-nefer’s son. Dinah is immediately struck by his beauty, and
					they stare at each other, intrigued. She blushes when she realizes
					how attracted they are to each other. The mother’s water breaks,
					and Dinah is pulled away from Shalem to deliver the baby. She stays
					in the palace that night then leaves the next morning, heartbroken
					that she may never see Shalem again. 

A short time later, the king sends for Dinah again to
					distract the young mother while she rests in confinement after the
					birth. Dinah quickly grows bored minding the young mother. Some
					days later, Re-nefer stops by and tells her to go to the marketplace
					with her maid to pick out some fruit for her son Shalem. Dinah wanders among
					the stalls, happy to be outside. Suddenly Shalem appears before
					her with a hungry look in his eyes. He puts his hand on her elbow,
					steering her back toward the castle where he pulls her into a shady
					corner to embrace. Minutes later he leads her to a private room
					with a bed, and they make love. Shalem calls Dinah “little wife.”
					They hold each other and weep with joy in each other’s arms. They
					fall asleep, wake up, and make love again. Food is left at their door
					and for several days they stay in seclusion, making love, talking,
					and sleeping together. Shalem tells Dinah that their lovemaking seals
					their marriage and that he will offer a handsome bride-price to her
					father. 

King Hamor departs for Jacob’s camp, where he makes a
					generous offer to Jacob and praises Dinah’s beauty. Jacob holds
					back, saying he will discuss the union with his sons when they return
					from town. Hamor reminds him that Dinah is no longer a virgin and
					that he offers a huge bride-price, but Jacob’s sons have poisoned
					their father’s mind against the king. Sensitive to their diminishing
					status, Simon and Levi reject the union and pull Jacob to their
					side to counsel him. Jacob finally declares that if all the men
					in Shechem agree to be circumcised, he will consent to the marriage.
					He explains his proposal to Hamor, and Shalem immediately agrees.
					Hamor further promises that every boy born within Shechem from that
					day forward will be circumcised and that Jacob’s god will be worshiped
					in their temples. Shalem is circumcised, and Dinah waits for him
					to heal, hating her father. A few nights later, Dinah wakes to the
					sound of a woman’s scream and discovers that she is covered in her
					husband’s blood. Her brothers have cut Shalem’s throat. Simon and Levi
					murder all of the men in Shechem that night, then carry Dinah back
					to their camp, screaming. 

Back at their camp Dinah’s mothers hold her to clean Shalem’s blood
					off of her body. Dinah pushes them away and runs out, screaming
					for Jacob. She goes before him to accuse him of murder and deceit
					before cursing him for eternity. She spits in his face, then curses
					each of her brothers in turn. In the middle of the night, she leaves
					her home forever and walks straight to Shechem. Dinah then takes
					a step back as narrator and describes the fates of each of her family
					members. Her mother Leah wakes up paralyzed one day and begs her
					daughters-in-law to give her poison. Rachel dies giving birth to
					her second son, Benjamin, and Jacob abandons her body by the side
					of the road. Zilpah dies of fever when Jacob smashes her goddesses,
					while Bilhah is caught in bed with Reuben and disappears after being
					beaten in punishment. Jacob changes his name to Isra’El so that
					he will not be identified as the butcher of Shechem.

Diamant rewrites the biblical rape of Dinah in Chapters
					Seven and Eight, which has contributedto the controversy over whether The Red
						Tent might be considered a midrash. For readers unfamiliar with
					the story of Dinah, the climax is at once shocking and horrifying
					while still believable. Diamant builds up to the climax by illustrating
					Jacob’s erratic judgment and growing irrationality, as well as the
					cruel and power-hungry natures of Simon and Levi. For readers familiar
					with the biblical story, this version of events might seem blasphemous.
					To completely rewrite “The Rape of Dinah” as a love story contradicts
					traditional midrash, in which a text fills in the holes of a story
					without rewriting its key details. According to Diamant, Dinah’s
					tale in the Bible is so brief that it requires more exploration
					to make logical sense. In the Bible, Dinah is raped and her brothers
					act out of revenge. The story also clearly states that Shalem loves
					Dinah and agrees to be circumcised and pay a heavy bride-price for
					his wife. The two aspects of the story seem to conflict with one
					another in the original texts. 

Diamant’s creation of a true love story between Dinah
					and Shalem fills in the logical gaps in the biblical version of
					the story. It is difficult to believe that a rapist would submit
					not only himself but also his entire community to circumcision,
					a painful operation considered to be emasculating at the time. Dinah’s
					story in the Bible begs many questions: how could her brothers have
					acted in such a way? Would a rapist behave honorably, as Shalem
					does? Because of these questions, Diamant’s version offers a more
					plausible sequence of events for the slaughter at Shechem. At the
					same time, it makes the tragedy of Dinah even more painful, because
					Dinah loses her true love. In rewriting Dinah’s story in such a
					way, Diamant encourages readers to assume that the women in the
					Bible have histories more complicated than the brief summaries written
					down by men. The stories, which depict men as the only important
					characters, are misleading. Diamant recasts the female characters,
					historically depicted as passive and victimized, as active agents
					who are capable of directing and transforming their own lives. Dinah
					changes “The Rape of Dinah” from a true physical rape by Shalem
					to a metaphorical rape of her soul by her brothers.

Jacob’s decision to permit the murder of Shalem does not
					come as a surprise given the foreshadowing that has preceded the
					rape of Dinah. Though the events are shocking, in the chapters preceding the
					climax, Diamant has prepared readers to accept an erratic and irrational
					Jacob who is capable of cruelty while establishing the intensity
					of the love affair between Dinah and Shalem. Jacob’s dreams before
					meeting his brother, his unabashed favoritism toward his cruelest
					sons, and his sudden destruction of the teraphim make his bizarre
					behavior toward his only daughter believable. Diamant also foreshadows
					the intense romance between Dinah and Shalem. Dinah has recently
					reached womanhood and has begun to feel some sexual frustration,
					though she has not been able to identify her feelings. When she
					first meets the handsome Shalem, one of the only nonrelative males
					she’s ever come across, she feels an overwhelming attraction. The
					pair have an instant chemical reaction that recalls the stories
					of Leah’s and Rachel’s introductions to Jacob. Diamant creates an
					immediate bond between the pair, and her descriptions of their coupling
					are intimate and thrilling. The intensity of their love makes the
					night of bloodshed all the more cruel and painful.

Dinah narrates the stories of the deaths of her mothers,
					each of which conveys the four sisters’ grief at losing Dinah. After
					Dinah’s departure, the sisters come unglued with no legacy to hold
					them together, causing each of them to go her own way. The four
					women die alone, uncertain of their only daughter’s fate and lacking
					the knowledge that anyone will carry on their stories and traditions. Though
					circumstances turn ugly for Dinah’s father and brothers as well,
					her mothers brought Dinah up and thus must bear the sorrow of her
					exile. The extent of their grief is apparent in the gruesomeness of
					their deaths—by poison, death in childbirth, and attempted suicide.
					Their reason for living seems to be gone. By giving us closure on
					these characters at the end of the second part of the novel, Diamant
					prepares us for the third part of the book, which recounts Dinah’s
					solitary journey to Egypt. 

