A white sociologist and educator, and the author of this book. Robin DiAngelo specializes in antiracist workplace training and relays her experiences and perspectives as an antiracist educator. By admitting that she too has inherent biases, she encourages the reader to accept the fact that every white American—herself included—needs to educate themselves about racism in American society.

A Black web developer and DiAngelo’s colleague. DiAngelo uses the pseudonym “Angela” to protect her privacy. Angela is offended when DiAngelo makes an inappropriate joke about a colleague’s “Black hair” and dismisses Angela’s survey requesting information related to developing a website. Angela gives DiAngelo feedback that she was offended by her comments amongst other behaviors. After reflecting, DiAngelo internalizes the feedback, apologizes to Angela, and dismantles her own white fragility instead of letting it erupt.

A 14-year-old Black child who was brutally murdered by white men in the summer of 1955 in Mississippi. After a white woman named Carolyn Bryant accused him of flirting with her, he was abducted, beaten, and violently killed. His killers were acquitted of the murder, and Bryant recanted her story on her deathbed in 2017.

A Black professional football player portrayed in the film The Blind Side. DiAngelo uses the film as an example of white savior mythology and says it perpetuates racist ideas. Oher's character only achieves upward mobility through sports and the benevolent white people around him.

A white male teacher accused of making racially discriminatory comments to a Black female student. “Mr. Palmer” is a pseudonym used by DiAngelo. Mr. Palmer becomes defensive when he receives feedback and displays white fragility when he blames society for being too sensitive rather than trying to understand the perspective of the young Black woman.

A white German woman DiAngelo encountered at a training. “Eva” claimed that she was not racist due to being born in Germany where she claimed there were no Black people. After being challenged on this, Eva became offended and accused DiAngelo of assuming she was racist. Eva shut down constructive conversation rather than reflecting on her unconscious inculcation into societal racism.

A scholar whom DiAngelo cites in her work. Frye uses the metaphor of a birdcage to describe the forces of oppression and a white person’s perception of racism.

A scholar whom DiAngelo cites in her work. Coates refers to race as the child of racism, not the father.

