Peachum and Mrs. Peachum are in their shop. Polly stands
					in the doorway carrying a traveling bag. She sings a song explaining
					her decision to marry Macheath. In the song, she describes how she grew
					up learning to protect herself from love. Even when the fellow was
					nice, had money and clean shirts, and treated her with respect, she
					learned to tell him no. But then she sings about how she met a fellow
					who was not nice, did not have money, wore dirty shirts, and showed
					no respect, but she could not tell him no. She refers to how the
					moon shined so brightly to her one evening that she decided to give
					love a chance.

Peachum and Mrs. Peachum are furious with her. They rail against
					her for leaving them. Peachum especially emphasizes how Polly getting
					married will impoverish him. Then five of Peachum’s beggars enter.
					One of them complains about his fake stump, which he says is totally
					inadequate, and he is not taking in enough money. Peachum replies
					that it is not his fault but gives the beggar another stump to try
					on. Meanwhile, Peachum examines the other beggars and finds them
					wanting. They are not sufficiently pathetic to his taste. One of
					them has even gained weight, so Peachum fires him. Peachum says
					that artists need to tug at people’s heartstrings. The beggars exit.

The family returns to their argument about Macheath. Polly defends
					Macheath, saying that he earns an excellent income. Peachum makes
					the argument that when a girl is married, the first thing she does
					is get divorced. Mrs. Peachum agrees that many people are seeking
					divorces. Polly protests that she is in love, and her mother says
					that Macheath has a bunch of different women and that when he is
					hanged, many of these women will enter the scene. The word hanged sparks
					an idea in Peachum. He sends Polly out and then tells Mrs. Peachum
					that he will report Macheath to the sheriff, collect the forty pounds’
					reward, and get Macheath hanged. Mrs. Peachum says she even knows
					where to find him: at Wapping, with the whores whose company he
					cannot live without. Polly has been listening at the door and re-enters
					to tell her mother that Macheath would rather go to jail than to
					visit the whores. She adds that even if Macheath went to jail, Brown
					would help him out because they are best friends. She tells her
					father that there is no record against Macheath at Scotland Yard.
					Peachum is confident that his scheme will work, though. He remarks
					that the world is evil and that everyone has to fight to keep what
					is his or hers all the time.

Then all three step forward to sing “First Threepenny
					Finale on the Uncertainty of Human Circumstances.” The song begins
					with Polly protesting her love, and Peachum responds that everyone
					has a right to happiness, but just because something fulfills Polly’s
					happiness, it does not mean Polly should have it. He adds that if
					everyone was good in the world and did not commit crimes, heaven would
					be a reality. However, the world is no heaven, and Peachum says
					that there is not enough of heaven to go around because morals are
					lacking. The world’s condition will not permit goodness. Mrs. Peachum
					and Polly take up his refrain about how miserable the world is.
					He describes how everyone would like a paradise, but when there
					are limited resources, even one’s family will steal to survive.
					The song ends with all three directly addressing to the audience,
					reprimanding them for ignoring the stupidity and baseness of the
					world.

This scene demonstrates false or vile reasoning may be
					used to make correct arguments. Macheath has a powerful ally in
					Brown, but Peachum thinks he can overcome that. The audience is
					in the ironic position of rooting for a murderer, thief, and adulterer
					to remain free. The arbitrariness of values is further developed
					through Peachum’s and Mrs. Peachum’s ironic attempts to convince
					their daughter to divorce Macheath. The irony of the scene lies
					in the fact that they are right that Macheath is not a good match
					for their daughter. He is dangerous, and he is also an incurable
					womanizer. The reasons that they argue their positions, however,
					are not based on their daughter’s welfare. Instead, they argue for
					Polly to stay with them because if she is not at the shop to help
					attract more clients, her absence will ruin the business. The Peachums
					disapprove of Polly’s marriage because they worry about their finances,
					not the safety of their daughter.

The scene further develops the contrast between Polly
					and Peachum. Polly is motivated by love, and Peachum is only interested
					in the financial gain of his business. Over the course of the scene,
					Peachum’s view comes across more strongly when he continues to speak
					over Polly. In her telling, love is an unstoppable force that is not
					about money or decency but about a true feeling. This declaration
					is incomprehensible to Peachum, of course, because anything that
					does not make one richer is folly to him. In his mind, Macheath is
					a competitor trying to take away one of his key assets, his daughter.
					Peachum’s argument forces his daughter to use economic terms to
					make her case. She claims that Macheath makes good money. Peachum
					pushes further and further, until by the end of the scene his view
					dominates. Polly and Mrs. Peachum sing along while he makes the
					case that everyone should only look out for themselves, and in this
					instance, Peachum looks out for the profit of his company.

The Peachums’ song alienates the audience because the
					opinions expressed challenge the audience to consider different
					points of view. Peachum sings about how one should only look out
					for oneself and not for others. However, Peachum only believes this
					view because he has not tried to think of others in his actions.
					The audience may disagree with this belief because in society people
					are taught to care for other people, not solely themselves. The
					song also emphasizes that although everyone should aspire for greater
					things, it does not mean everyone should have them. This part of
					the song implies that no matter how hard one works for something,
					he or she should not be guaranteed success. Again, society has stressed
					a more positive view, so this view may not make sense to the audience. Brecht
					wants to make the audience uncomfortable and even offended by these
					statements. Through the lines of the song, Brecht implies that the
					audience should argue with the song and come up with a way in which
					the world could work better than the world portrayed in The
						Threepenny Opera.

Peachum behaves like a frustrated director working with
					inferior talent when he deals with his employees. He bemoans the
					fact that his beggars are not true artists and thus cannot create
					the proper feelings of pity. However, since many of Peachum’s beggars
					are fake, they are not in a terrible, desperate state and therefore
					have trouble eliciting sympathy from others. By pairing actors who
					can “tug at people’s heartstrings” with fake beggars to sell pity
					as a commodity, the play criticizes performers who measure the quality
					of their acting by creating sorrow from the upper classes.

