Obasan wakes Naomi. They go to the attic, where Obasan
					searches for something. Naomi sees the tools Grandpa Nakane brought
					from Japan. Obasan finds an old ID of Uncle’s, signed by an RCMP inspector.
					As Obasan looks through old possessions, Naomi muses that she and
					Obasan are trapped by memories of their dead relatives. A glimpse
					of an old quilt makes her return to the old question of why her
					mother never came back. As a child, Naomi asked Obasan about her
					mother, but Obasan provided no information. Now, Obasan can’t find
					what she is looking for, and Naomi helps her back to bed.

Naomi dreams that she and a man encounter another couple
					in a forest on a mountain. Together, the two couples work at some unknown
					but necessary task. Suddenly, Naomi sees a giant animal that may
					be a combination of lion and dog. The animal belongs to the other
					man, who resembles a British officer. When the animal yawns, Naomi
					realizes that it is a robot. In an ancient language, the other woman
					explains a contract between herself and the man. Then Uncle appears
					with a rose in his mouth, performing a death dance. Naomi sees that
					the man is wearing an army uniform.

Naomi wakes and goes downstairs. A package from Aunt Emily has
					arrived. Obasan points to an orange box and says it is what she was
					looking for in the attic.

The package contains a scrapbook, a folder, an envelope,
					and a journal. On a scrap of paper, Naomi sees that Aunt Emily has
					written, “ ‘Write the vision and make it plain. Habakkuk 2:2.’
					” Aunt Emily believes in the strength of the Nisei (second generation
					Japanese Canadians), whereas Naomi thinks the Nisei want only to
					pass unnoticed. Aunt Emily is a woman of many words, constantly
					writing, crusading, and attending conferences.

Naomi recalls Aunt Emily’s last post-conference visit
					to Granton. Aunt Emily had shown Naomi a pamphlet on racial discrimination
					during and after World War II. According to Aunt Emily, Canada is
					more racist than the United States. While Japanese were interned
					in both countries, American Japanese were allowed to retain their
					property and to form large communities after the war. As Aunt Emily
					talked about using language to disguise racism, Naomi felt unmoved.

At home, during the same visit, Aunt Emily showed Uncle
					a WWII-era form letter from the government, demanding that the Japanese
					hand over their property. There was also a form letter from an official
					named B. Good explaining that Aunt Emily’s mother’s house now belongs
					to Canada. Aunt Emily mentioned that the government gave Grandpa
					Kato three dollars for his Cadillac. Another letter tells Uncle
					to register as an Enemy Alien. A sixty-page manuscript by Aunt Emily
					asserts that despite everything that has happened to her, she identifies
					strongly as a Canadian. Finally, Aunt Emily showed Naomi a scrapbook
					full of racist newspaper clippings. Naomi wondered if they should
					leave the past in the past. Uncle said he considered Aunt Emily’s
					efforts unladylike and un-Japanese. Obasan did not join the conversation.
					Both Uncle and Obasan expressed gratitude toward Canada.

Obasan is something of a mystic. She doesn’t talk a great
					deal, and when she does, she speaks in abstractions. Her deafness
					only adds to her enigmatic quality. Because she can’t hear, she
					can’t engage much with the world around her. Effectively unable
					to take in verbal information, she can only output words. Therefore,
					what she says often seems disconnected from everyday life. She makes
					obscure pronouncements such as “ ‘Everything is forgetfulness’ ”
					and “ ‘Everyone someday dies.’ ” She says these vaguely spiritual
					remarks unprompted, in response to nothing in particular. While
					Obasan’s deafness may account for her unmoored speech to some extent, opacity
					seems to have been a hallmark of her character even when she was
					a young woman. We learn, for example, that she refused to answer
					Naomi’s questions about her mother’s disappearance. If we as readers
					have a difficult time understanding Obasan, so too do the people
					who know her best.

Naomi’s dream reflects some of the themes Kogawa has introduced.
					The British officer is the authority figure, the person directing everyone’s
					actions, just as in real life Naomi’s family has often had to bow
					down to the wishes of Canadian authority figures. Uncle’s death
					dance suggests his recent passing. Naomi’s dreamed interest in puzzling
					out the relationships between people demonstrates her need to understand
					the relationships between the members of her own family. And the
					delay she experiences before she recognizes the truth—the animal
					is actually a robot, the officer is actually wearing a uniform—suggests
					her real-world difficulty in understanding family mysteries.

Aunt Emily, Naomi, and Uncle and Obasan hold very different views
					on what Japanese Canadians should do, and how they should feel,
					about Canada’s racist past. Aunt Emily believes that until Japanese
					Canadians process what happened to them and to their forebears,
					and deal with their repressed feelings, they are doomed to pass
					on anger and resentment to future generations. She is furious about
					the crimes committed during WWII, and believes Japanese Canadians
					should keep what happened then in the forefront of their minds.
					Naomi can’t work up much passion about events that happened so long
					ago. She feels that there’s no sense in raking up past injustices.
					On the other end of the spectrum, farthest from Aunt Emily, Obasan
					and Uncle are full of affection for Canada, and feel blessed to
					be allowed to live in the country in the first place. Far from wanting
					to debate the matter or defend their beliefs, they would rather
					not mention the topic at all. By giving her characters such opposing
					views, and then putting them in a room together and letting them
					fight it out, Kogawa is able to capture the different sides in the
					debate on racism and how it affects Japanese Canadians.

Aunt Emily is a particularly useful character for Kogawa.
					By making Emily an activist who is constantly attending conferences, Kogawa
					can justify inserting lots of background information into her narrative.
					Newspaper clippings, passages from books, form letters, and general
					history are constantly fluttering out of Aunt Emily’s voluminous
					library of material and into the novel. The device may be slightly
					clumsy, but it provides us with a primer on the issues so close
					to Aunt Emily’s heart.

