Nnaife, Nnu Ego’s husband, is the chief male presence in The Joys
					of Motherhood, the counterpart and mirror reflection of his wife.
				The two stand on opposite sides of a similar conflict. While Nnu Ego must
				reconcile her own disillusionment with motherhood, Nnaife faces his own
				struggles in the wake of evolving tradition and the slow dissolve of their
				family structure. Nnu Ego calls Nnaife’s masculinity into question from the
				early days of their marriage. Nnaife is filled with pride at the
				responsibilities he has as a launderer in the Meers household, a role no Ibo man
				would have filled in previous generations. Nnaife is forced to compromise in a
				world where capitalism reigns and where power is in the hands
				of white colonialists. Still, despite changing with the times, Nnaife retains
				his traditional notions of his role as father, husband, and man. But in his
				modern urban context, he is viewed more as a functionary, a mere figurehead of a
				family that is mostly supported and held together by the efforts of Nnu Ego.

Nnaife is a passive, ineffective figure whose lack of ambition or
				connections does little to further the livelihood of his family. He allows
				others to control or intercede for him, all the while believing he is a figure
				of power, strength, and action. As traditions and times change, they render
				Nnaife increasingly ineffective in his role as a male authority figure. In the
				end, he simply playacts at the part of the blustering patriarch rather than
				truly embodying or living up to the duties he is expected to fulfill. He emerges
				as an emasculated figure and is unmasked as a poor provider and a drunk, the
				equivalent of a deadbeat dad. As Nnaife’s traditional male identity grows weaker
				and more threatened, he descends deeper into alcoholism and an aloof, willful
				detachment, both of which serve as safeguards and antidotes to reality. In a
				final act of desperation, he threatens to kill his own daughter and her new
				father-in-law. In his skewed vision of the world, individual lives and the
				happiness of his daughter are secondary to more abstract notions of family
				reputation, honor, and tradition. His subsequent imprisonment serves as symbolic
				punishment for a man who has grown so out of step with the world around
				him.

