Jack worries that Heinrich has a receding hairline. He
					wonders if this is his fault as the boy’s father or if toxins in
					the air are to blame. As Jack drives Heinrich to school, Jack tries
					to initiate a mundane conversation about the weather. Heinrich refuses
					to entertain Jack’s attempt and parries each of Jack’s comments
					with a deadpan philosophical retort. As he watches Heinrich walk
					away from the car, Jack is suddenly seized by a desperate love for
					his son, whom he feels has a strange way of attracting danger to
					himself. 

In a movie theater on campus, Jack prepares a screening
					of a documentary for his Advanced Nazism seminar. In the film, which
					has no narrator, Jack has collected excerpts from Nazi propaganda films,
					featuring long shots of marches, meetings, and massive crowd scenes.
					At the end of the screening, a student asks Jack about the plot
					to kill Hitler. Jack surprises himself by responding, “All plots tend
					to move deathward. This is the nature of plots.” Later, he wonders
					if he actually believes his own proclamation.

Twice a week, Babette teaches a posture class for the
					elderly in a church basement. Jack speculates that her students
					feel they can ward off death through proper grooming, and he always
					finds himself surprised by the faith Babette’s students put in her
					exercises. Jack walks Babette home from class, and when they arrive
					they fall into bed. They discuss what they’ll do that evening, and
					Babette offers to read him something sexy. Jack considers how open
					and honest their relationship is. Jack and Babette tell each other
					everything, and, in that retelling, Jack believes they not only
					draw closer to one another but also manage to distance themselves
					from painful events in their past. Jack goes off in search of a
					trashy magazine from which Babette can read him letters. Instead,
					he finds several old family albums. Jack and Babette look through
					the albums for hours, and as they flip through the images, Jack
					once again finds himself wondering, “Who will die first?”

Embarrassed by his inability to speak German, despite
					his position as chair of Hitler studies, Jack secretly begins taking
					lessons from a man named Howard Dunlop, a reclusive, taciturn man
					who lives in Murray’s boarding house. Jack has a hostile relationship
					with the German language, and he describes it as a harsh, strange
					entity. When Dunlop speaks German, it seems to Jack that Dunlop
					transforms into an entirely different being. Jack finds the language
					distasteful, but the College-on-the-Hill is hosting a Hitler conference the
					following spring, and it would be incredibly shameful if it were revealed
					that the chairman of the department couldn’t speak German. 

After the lesson, Jack stops by Murray’s room and invites
					him over for dinner. Murray puts away his copy of American
						Transvestite and puts on his corduroy jacket. On their
					way out of the house, Murray comments that his landlord is a great
					handyman, then laments the landlord’s bigotry. Jack asks Murray
					why he thinks his landlord is a bigot, and Murray responds that
					people who can fix things are always bigots.

Back at Jack’s house, a flurry of noise and activity awaits
					the two men, as Denise runs the trash compactor, Heinrich talks
					on the phone, Babette enters the house from running, and Steffie
					repeats a radio program’s admonishment to boil tap water before
					drinking. In the middle of all this sound, Wilder sits, happy and
					silent.

Jack surprises himself with the comment that “all plots
					tend toward death,” but the aphorism becomes a resonant refrain
					in White Noise, much like the repeated question
					“Who will die first?” On the one hand, plots, schemes, secrets,
					and conspiracies comprise a running motif throughout the novel.
					Murray and the other American environments professors purport to
					find secret codes in the white noise of popular culture. Jack notes
					that all his former wives were secretive and anxious and involved
					in espionage and foreign intelligence. Babette, on the other hand,
					is open, guileless, and wholesome. Jack takes great comfort in her
					honesty and forthrightness and often compares her to his guarded
					ex-wives. In marrying Babette, Jack has rejected plots in favor
					of plain dealings. His surprising comment suggests that by rejecting
					his plotting ex-wives and embracing an open life with Babette, Jack
					feels as if he is pushing away death itself, an important move given
					his oft-expressed fear of death. 

The word plot also resonates in a literary
					sense. At this point, White Noise exhibits no conventional
					sense of plot. If anything, the narrative actively resists forming
					itself into a plot, as the novel circles and ambles with no clear
					direction. Yet if it is true that all plots tend toward death, then
					perhaps Jack’s persistent fear of dying is actively keeping the
					novel from settling into a schematic, logical plot structure. Language
					often features in White Noise as a coping mechanism.
					Like the din of technology and human activity, language helps alleviate
					the fear and anxiety at the heart of the human condition. As the
					narrator of the novel, Jack has the tools of language and storytelling
					at his disposal. If death is what he fears, and all plots lead to
					death, then naturally Jack’s own narrative would try to avoid having
					a plot. 

The role of the German language in these chapters develops
					a few different themes. The fact that Jack, despite being an expert
					in Hitler studies, cannot speak German presents an embarrassing
					contradiction to his carefully constructed academic persona. Of
					course, a strong command of German would be necessary in order to
					truly study the documents and artifacts of Nazi Germany. The fact
					that Jack lacks this skill further demonstrates Jack’s interest
					in the cultural myths that surround Hitler in Jack’s English-speaking
					world, rather than in the historical despot himself. In addition,
					the German language is presented as a dark, foreboding entity, but
					one that is ambiguous about the danger it evokes. When Howard Dunlop begins
					to speak German, Jack notes that there is a “scrape and gargle that
					sounded like the stirring of some beast’s ambition” and that there
					were “harsh noises damp with passion.” The language represents something
					primordial and primitive to Jack, something that he discerns as
					lying at the very base of human existence. Jack’s inability to connect
					with German may suggest his inability, as a modern man living in
					a mechanized age, to connect with a primal, natural state of being.
					As the novel progresses, Jack will become increasingly aware of
					a nameless, ancient sound lying behind the white noise of modern life. 

Jack’s concerns about the potential toxins in the environment and
					the air of danger that surrounds his son foreshadow some of the events
					that will occur later in the novel. In addition, these concerns add
					an element of depth and humanity to both Jack and Heinrich, which
					highlights their emotional bond as father and son. Jack’s moment
					of concern comes directly after he and Heinrich have engaged in
					a highly theoretical, comically absurd argument about the weather.
					Straightforward and heartfelt, Jack’s desire to protect his son
					contrasts with the ironic, abstracted attitude he previously displayed.
					While much of the novel functions more as collections of witty dialogue
					than as dialogue between fully-realized characters, moments like
					these highlight the fact that White Noise remains deeply
					concerned with the emotional dimensions of the human condition.

