Often cited as Dickens’s first convincing female character,
Estella is a supremely ironic creation, one who darkly undermines
the notion of romantic love and serves as a bitter criticism against
the class system in which she is mired. Raised from the age of three
by Miss Havisham to torment men and “break their hearts,” Estella
wins Pip’s deepest love by practicing deliberate cruelty. Unlike
the warm, winsome, kind heroine of a traditional love story, Estella
is cold, cynical, and manipulative. Though she represents Pip’s
first longed-for ideal of life among the upper classes, Estella
is actually even lower-born than Pip; as Pip learns near the end
of the novel, she is the daughter of Magwitch, the coarse convict,
and thus springs from the very lowest level of society.

Ironically, life among the upper classes does not represent
salvation for Estella. Instead, she is victimized twice by her adopted
class. Rather than being raised by Magwitch, a man of great inner
nobility, she is raised by Miss Havisham, who destroys her ability
to express emotion and interact normally with the world. And rather than
marrying the kindhearted commoner Pip, Estella marries the cruel
nobleman Drummle, who treats her harshly and makes her life miserable
for many years. In this way, Dickens uses Estella’s life to reinforce
the idea that one’s happiness and well-being are not deeply connected
to one’s social position: had Estella been poor, she might have
been substantially better off.

Despite her cold behavior and the damaging influences
in her life, Dickens nevertheless ensures that Estella is still
a sympathetic character. By giving the reader a sense of her inner
struggle to discover and act on her own feelings rather than on
the imposed motives of her upbringing, Dickens gives the reader
a glimpse of Estella’s inner life, which helps to explain what Pip
might love about her. Estella does not seem able to stop herself
from hurting Pip, but she also seems not to want to hurt him; she
repeatedly warns him that she has “no heart” and seems to urge him
as strongly as she can to find happiness by leaving her behind.
Finally, Estella’s long, painful marriage to Drummle causes her
to develop along the same lines as Pip—that is, she learns, through
experience, to rely on and trust her inner feelings. In the final
scene of the novel, she has become her own woman for the first time
in the book. As she says to Pip, “Suffering has been stronger than
all other teaching. . . . I have been bent and broken, but—I hope—into
a better shape.”

Take the Analysis of Major Characters Quick Quiz

