This chapter unfolds in a stream of consciousness, as
					Jack narrates seemingly unrelated moments from his days. We begin
					in the supermarket, where Jack and Babette discuss Jack’s health.
					When he makes a motion to go down another aisle, Babette says she’s
					afraid to be alone. 

Jack tell us that the déjà vu crisis centers have closed,
					now that people seem to be forgetting things.

During one of his German lessons, Jack spots a German
					translation of The Egyptian Book of the Dead, which
					Howard Dunlop informs him was a best-seller in Germany. 

Jack rummages through Denise’s room, browsing absentmindedly.
					He moves through the house, throwing away all kinds of clutter.
					He hears Babette listening to talk radio and the sound of the gas meter.

That night, Jack goes into Heinrich’s room, where the
					boy is watching a news report. Two bodies have been discovered in
					someone’s backyard, and the reporter says that twenty or thirty
					bodies are expected to be uncovered. But as time goes on, no more
					bodies are found, and everyone experiences a sense of failed expectations.

Jack continues to have trouble sleeping, so he wakes up
					Babette and demands to know Mr. Gray’s real name and the company
					he worked for so that he can try Dylar for himself. Babette refuses
					to tell him, because she’s afraid he wants to kill Mr. Gray. The
					next morning, Jack continues to press the issue, arguing that Mr.
					Gray will be impressed with him as a test subject, since he is actually
					scheduled to die soon. Babette says that Dylar was her mistake and
					she won’t let it become his mistake as well.

That afternoon, Jack sees Winnie Richards on campus and
					runs after her. He finally catches up to her at the top of the hill,
					where he can see the sun setting. He notes that he can say nothing
					about the sunset except that it is “another postmodern sunset, rich
					in romantic imagery.” Jack and Winnie discuss the beauty of the
					sunsets and what might be causing them, and then Jack tells Winnie
					what he has learned about Dylar. Winnie claims that she would never
					want to lose her fear of death, because it adds texture and meaning
					to life. She tells him to forget the drug. They watch the sunset
					and walk down the hill.

The chapter opens with instructions for paying a cable
					bill. 

Jack notes that no one wants to cook, so the entire family
					goes to a take-out restaurant and eats in the car. Jack comments
					that eating this way represents a kind of rigor and strictness,
					as they eat, fully dressed and facing forward, without speaking
					to one another. Watching Babette suck on chicken bones, he has to
					fight off an image of Mr. Gray lying naked on a motel bed. 

Steffie quietly asks how astronauts float, which begins
					a conversation about space. After a pause, Steffie asks how cold
					space is, which prompts another conversation. After another long
					pause, Babette says that she’s heard that Russian psychics have
					been causing the strange weather patterns they have been experiencing
					lately. 

Jack tells us that there’s been a rash of UFO sightings
					lately. In the backseat, the children grow restless, and Jack says
					he can feel a sulky menace radiating from them. Babette tries to
					distract them by asking why UFO sightings always seem to happen
					upstate. Denise says it’s because mountains are upstate, and when
					Steffie asks why mountains are upstate, Denise says that mountains
					are upstate so that, when the snow melts, the water can run down
					to the reservoirs near cities, which are all located in the southern
					parts of the state for exactly this reason. Although he realizes
					that Denise’s logic cannot possibly be true, Jack finds himself
					momentarily wondering if she’s right.

At home, Jack receives a postcard from Mary Alice, his
					eldest child with Dana Breedlove. Babette tells him that the two
					things she wants most in the world are for Jack not to die first
					and for Wilder to stay the way he is forever. 

Jack and Murray walk across campus, discussing the progress
					of Jack’s German lessons. Murray notes that something especially strange
					emanates from Howard Dunlop. Murray calls Jack four days later to
					tell him that he thinks Howard is the type of man who would find
					dead bodies erotic. After that comment, Jack finds that he can’t
					continue with his German lessons.

The local insane asylum burns down, and Jack and Heinrich
					go to watch. As the lawn burns, a patient from the asylum walks
					across the grass. Murray shows up and then abruptly disappears.
					An acrid, burning odor fills the air, and everyone begins to leave.
					Jack thinks that people feel betrayed by the odor, as if the synthetic
					smell were interrupting a purer, more natural occurrence. That night,
					instead of sleeping, Jack stays up thinking about Babette and Mr.
					Gray. 

The presence of Dylar has changed not only Jack and Babette’s
					relationship but also Jack and Babette as individuals. They have stopped
					saying, “Who will die first?” in favor of, “How do you feel?” This
					question seems, on the surface, less ominous and harmful than the
					latter. Now that both have confessed their fear of dying and infidelity,
					the question gains a desperate immediacy. At the same time, Jack’s
					faith in the things he thought could protect him from death is beginning
					to disintegrate. The revelation of Babette’s infidelity and secrecy
					proves the biggest blow, but he also suffers a setback when he leans
					from Howard Dunlop that The Egyptian Book of the Dead was
					a best-seller in Germany. The notion that a book on spiritually
					and psychically coping with death could prove resonant with Germans
					seems contradictory and strange to Jack, who has always held German
					culture as symbol of forthrightness, strength, and power. Jack’s
					erosion of faith has also affected his confidence; he becomes even
					more uncertain and insecure. When he cancels his German lessons
					after his conversation with Murray, he not only abandons his faith
					in German as a shield or bolster, but he also shows how susceptible
					he has become to rumors and misinformation. Jack’s inability to
					refute Denise’s childish argument about mountains being upstate
					is further evidence that his intellect and logic are beginning to
					fail him.

Insecure and feeling singled out by death, Jack continues
					to seek comfort where he can. Running after Winnie Richards and
					eating massive quantities of food are two purely physical acts that
					strenuously engage his body, offering relief from his intellectual
					insecurity. Jack’s obsession with Mr. Gray is linked as much to
					his fear of dying as it is to his basic instinct for revenge. By
					indulging in one, he can block or limit the other. As a result,
					he stays awake late into the evening thinking of Mr. Gray and arguing
					with Babette about why she should tell him about this mysterious
					researcher. The cable bill, with the authority of its meticulously
					detailed instructions, provides another respite from Jack’s fears
					and anxieties, just as paying bills was a relief at the start of
					the airborne toxic event. By addressing the cable bill, Jack manages
					to assert some kind of control over his increasingly disorienting
					life, much the same as the senior citizens who take Babette’s posture
					and eating and drinking classes hope to assert some control over
					their aging, weakening bodies. 

