Rhett comes to visit and reminds Scarlett that he loaned
					her the money to buy the mill on condition that she refrain from
					using the money to help Ashley. Noting that Ashley is now being
					paid to run the mill, Rhett tells Scarlett she has become unscrupulous.
					Scarlett insists that she had no choice and says she will be kind
					once she is rich and secure. Laughing, Rhett tells her to urge Frank
					to spend more nights at home. Scarlett thinks Rhett is insinuating
					that Frank is having an affair, but Rhett laughs and departs, leaving
					Scarlett confused and angry.

By March, Georgia has come under harsh military rule for
					its refusal to grant the vote to blacks. Tensions mount between
					the freed blacks, the Confederate whites, the Yankee soldiers, and
					the Ku Klux Klan. One day, driving through the dangerous black area
					of Shantytown, Scarlett encounters Big Sam, who is wanted for killing a
					Yankee. Scarlett decides to help him escape to Tara and tells him
					to meet her in the same spot that night. She rides to the mill,
					where she finds that Johnnie Gallegher has been starving and whipping
					the convicts. She flies into a rage, but Johnnie threatens to quit
					unless she gives him free reign to do as he pleases. Remembering
					that he has doubled the mill’s productivity, Scarlett lets the matter
					drop. On her way back through Shantytown, Scarlett is attacked by
					a poor white man and his black companion. Big Sam appears and fights
					the attackers. He then jumps into Scarlett’s carriage and drives
					her to safety as she collapses in sobs.

That night, Frank sends Scarlett to Melanie’s house while
					he and Ashley attend a political meeting. At Melanie’s, the other
					women and Archie seem strangely tense. Rhett appears and asks Melanie where
					Ashley and Frank have gone, saying that it is a matter of life and
					death. Melanie tells him they have gone to the old Sullivan plantation,
					and Rhett disappears. Melanie explains to Scarlett that Frank and
					Ashley are Klansmen, as are all the men they know, and they have
					gone to avenge the attack on Scarlett.

A Yankee regiment bursts in and demands to know the men’s location.
					At last Rhett, Ashley, and a man named Hugh Elsing stumble in drunkenly.
					Rhett tells the Yankee captain that he and the other men were at
					Belle Watling’s house all night. The Yankee, a friend of Rhett’s,
					is suspicious but embarrassed, and he quickly departs. Rhett dispatches
					Archie to burn the Klan robes and dispose of two unspecified dead
					bodies. Ashley is not drunk but wounded, and Scarlett realizes the
					whole scene has been a desperate cover-up. In her concern for Ashley,
					Scarlett hardly notices Frank’s absence. Rhett finally informs her
					that Frank has been shot through the head.

The next day, a Yankee court calls Belle, Ashley, and
					Rhett to testify about the events of the preceding evening, and
					their convincing alibi clears them of all charges. Melanie expresses
					her gratitude and admiration to Belle, who is dumbstruck that a
					great lady like Melanie has stooped to speak to a prostitute. The
					other Confederate women in Atlanta look down on Scarlett for her
					connection to the preceding evening’s events.

Scarlett sits alone in her bedroom, drinking brandy and
					feeling sick with guilt. She believes that she manipulated Frank
					into marrying her and then caused his death. Rhett arrives and proposes
					to Scarlett. Surprised, Scarlett refuses and tells Rhett that she
					does not love him. Rhett tells her to marry him for fun. He takes
					her in his arms and kisses her deeply. Feeling dizzy and faint,
					Scarlett accepts the proposal. Rhett says he must leave for a long
					trip but that they will be married when he returns. Atlanta is scandalized
					to hear about Scarlett’s engagement to Rhett, but Scarlett ignores
					the gossip, marries Rhett, and goes to New Orleans for a long honeymoon.

In this section, the pervasive influence of the Ku Klux
					Klan becomes clear. The Klan plays a pivotal role in the lives of
					many of the novel’s most prominent male characters. Now, for the
					first time, both we and Scarlett begin to understand the extent
					of Klan involvement among the white men of Atlanta. Scarlett’s friends
					have kept her in the dark about Frank’s Klan involvement, knowing
					that she disapproves of the Klan. Scarlett believes that Frank goes
					out to political meetings at night, even when Rhett laughingly hints
					at Frank’s Klan membership by urging Scarlett to have Frank spend
					more nights at home. She remains oblivious to Frank’s Klan involvement
					until the night he is killed. In Chapter XLV, Scarlett’s peaceful
					oblivion shatters when she learns that not only Frank but also Ashley
					and all the other Southern men she knows, young and old, have joined
					the Atlanta Klan. No one in Scarlett’s circle is untouched by the
					Klan, because Klansmen will avenge any attacks—real, threatened,
					or imagined—on them or their women. The Yankees in power keep a watchful
					eye on the Klansmen, waiting for any chance to jump on them and
					convict them. When the Klan moves or takes action against people
					they consider to be enemies, the Klansmen put themselves in great
					danger. Only Rhett’s quick scheming saves the prominent men involved
					in revenge against Scarlett’s attackers. 

	As a result of the Klan raid, not only does Scarlett
					lose Frank but she also invokes the wrath of Atlanta. The women
					of Scarlett’s society blame Scarlett for endangering their men.
					The Klan believes that any attack on a member of that society must
					be revenged, so if Scarlett provoked the attack then she must be
					held responsible for whatever happens to the men engaged in the
					revenge mission. Scarlett already feels guilty about Frank’s death,
					and to be held responsible for the woes of the other women is too
					much for her to bear. The Atlanta women hate Scarlett because she
					has apparently endangered Southern men and even gotten some killed,
					and furthermore because they must now feel grateful to Rhett Butler,
					whom they detest, and to Belle, whom they scorn. After the raid,
					Scarlett feels cast out of her society. This feeling partially explains
					her hasty engagement to Rhett. Although the engagement at first
					seems selfish, the scorn of Scarlett’s society makes it easier and
					perhaps even comforting for Scarlett to break with this society
					and marry Rhett, another outcast. 

	The attack on Scarlett once again illustrates the novel’s
					racist implication that good slaves remain loyal to their masters
					and freed slaves are always violent and bad. The events are almost
					cartoonish, as the figure of the bad slave, who accepts his freedom,
					does evil to Scarlett, while the figure of the good slave, who rejects
					his freedom, does good for her. The freed slave who attacks Scarlett
					presumably lives in Shantytown, which the novel depicts as a hotbed
					of rebelliousness. Big Sam, who saves Scarlett, has just announced
					that he is tired of freedom and wants to go back to Tara to work
					for the O’Haras. This desire to leave Shantytown is supposed to
					demonstrate Big Sam’s essential goodness, since he clearly wants
					no part of the seedy stirrings of the freed slaves.  Scarlett’s
					attack is one of many incidents in which Mitchell glorifies slaves
					like Mammy, Pork, and Uncle Peter who reject freedom in favor of
					staying with their old masters. She also vilifies slaves who leave
					their old masters and move to the cities, portraying them as insolent
					and menacing. While this racism probably reflects the attitudes
					of whites in Scarlett’s time and even in Mitchell’s time, it is
					one of the reasons why blacks and whites protested at theaters across
					the country when the movie version of Gone with the Wind premiered
					in 1939.

