At that moment [Cosette] suddenly felt
						that the weight of the bucket was gone.

The novel reintroduces us to Cosette on Christmas Eve
					of 1823, one month after Valjean disappears
					in the waters of Toulon. She is now eight years old and still lives
					with the Thénardiers in Montfermeil. They force Cosette to work,
					beat her, insult her mother, and practically starve her, while pampering
					and spoiling their own two daughters, Eponine and Azelma. But they
					treat their baby boy, Gavroche, as poorly as Cosette, viewing him
					as merely another mouth to feed.

A group of travelers arrive at the inn, and Mme. Thénardier orders
					Cosette to go to the woods to fetch a bucket of water. Cosette is
					terrified of going into the woods at night and tries to delay, but Mme.
					Thénardier screams at her to hurry. The forest is dark, cold, and
					terrifying, and when Cosette fills the bucket, she can barely carry
					it. She cries out to God. Out of nowhere, a large hand reaches down
					and lifts the bucket from her shoulders. Though Cosette does not
					know her rescuer, she is remarkably not afraid of the large man holding
					the bucket.

The man, who is Valjean, is surprised to learn that this
					girl is Cosette. He follows her back to the Thénardiers’ inn, where
					he intends to spend the night. Valjean is shocked to see how Cosette
					is treated at the inn, and he throws money around to persuade the Thénardiers
					to let her enjoy Christmas Eve. The Thénardiers realize that their
					guest is wealthy and begin to treat him better. They are particularly
					astonished when he steps out into the street and returns with an
					expensive doll as a gift for Cosette.

The next morning, Valjean asks the Thénardiers to give
					him Cosette. Mme. Thénardier jumps at the opportunity, but M. Thénardier
					pretends to be reluctant to part with the girl, hoping to gouge
					more money out of Valjean. Without haggling, Valjean pays Thénardier 1,500 francs
					and leaves with Cosette. Thénardier runs after them to demand more
					money. He says he cannot give away Cosette without permission from
					her mother, and Valjean produces the note from Fantine. Thénardier
					argues, but when he notices Valjean’s physical size, he decides
					it is more prudent to let the matter go. Safe at last, Cosette falls
					asleep in Valjean’s arms.

Valjean has been a noble figure since his redemption,
					but in this section he comes across as almost saintly, particularly
					when contrasted with the Thénardiers. Significantly, Valjean arrives
					in Montfermeil on Christmas Eve and seizes Cosette’s bucket at the
					exact moment that she cries out to God—details that make his entrance
					seem divine. The idea that Valjean is Cosette’s savior is reinforced
					by his selfless generosity. He pays money so that Cosette can take
					time off on Christmas Eve, and when Thénardier demands 1,500 francs
					to release Cosette, Valjean pays the sum without hesitation. The
					fact that Valjean does not haggle may come across as implausibly
					passive—after all, there is no reason why he cannot be compassionate but
					still bargain. Yet it becomes more understandable when we see Thénardier’s
					greedy maneuvering for the best price. Thénardier may be skilled
					at getting a material bargain, but his willingness to sell a child
					and haggle over the price shows that he is spiritually bankrupt.

Hugo’s disdain for materialism pervades his descriptions
					of the Thénardiers’ tavern. The detailed descriptions of the couple’s belongings
					and of the various ways in which they cheat others reveal how thoroughly
					their lives are dominated by the quest for money and possessions.
					The Thénardiers’ pursuit of material goods leads them to engage
					in an unending series of immoral acts, from tax evasion to child
					slavery. The fact that the Thénardiers regard their third child
					as little more than a drain on household finances further underscores
					their greed. Despite all of these schemes, the Thénardiers never
					feel as if they have enough cash—their love of money verges on an
					addiction.

Hugo proposes love as the antidote to such materialism,
					and the moment when Valjean takes Cosette in his arms demonstrates Hugo’s
					belief that love enriches all parties involved. Indeed, Hugo stresses
					the importance of love above all other emotions. Although Valjean’s
					arrival heralds a new sense of safety for Cosette, it is not until
					he actually takes her in his arms that she feels whole. Love transforms
					Valjean’s quest from a simple rescue mission into something true
					and fulfilling. His life is still missing something, especially since
					helping others has so far been a thankless task. When Valjean picks
					up Cosette, however, he discovers that good deeds can bring the
					joy of being loved. His previous actions made him content, but his
					love for Cosette makes him supremely happy, beginning the second
					and final stage of his spiritual transformation.

