Marion Burgess 

Tom’s wife and one of the book’s two narrators. Marion is a schoolteacher who falls in love with Tom when she is a teenager. She is aware of the social conventions that her gender imposes on her in 1950s England and pushes against those restrictions in some ways, such as pursuing education and a career. Marion is frustrated by the tension between her intense sexual desire for Tom and the expectation that women must accept the attention of men rather than pursuing it. She also grapples with her intense feelings about Tom’s sexuality throughout the four decades of their marriage, evolving from denial to possessive destruction to acceptance. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Marion Burgess

Patrick Hazlewood 

Tom’s lover and one of the book’s two narrators. Older than Tom and Marion, Patrick is an artist and intellectual. A kind and generous man, he seeks connection with others throughout the book and falls deeply in love with Tom. While Patrick is internally comfortable with his sexuality, he maintains discretion given the real danger his gayness poses to his life and reputation. Though he accepts that he must share Tom with Marion, society’s prejudice against gay people ultimately costs him everything. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Patrick Hazlewood

Tom Burgess 

The title character, Marion’s husband, and Patrick’s lover. Tom is physically attractive but resists emotional intimacy, even with Patrick. He is methodical and enjoys solitude, maintaining a lifelong habit of daily ocean swims and, later in life, long walks alone. Though he enjoys the security and social acceptability of his marriage to Marion, his heart belongs to Patrick, and he experiences immense, decades-long grief over losing him. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Tom Burgess

Julia Harcourt 

A teacher at St. Luke’s who becomes Marion’s friend. Experienced, practical, and fun, Julia is a good friend to Marion, encouraging her to broaden her perspective at school and in the rest of her life. She comes out to Marion as a lesbian, and when Marion reacts poorly, she ultimately flees the city. 

Sylvie Burgess 

Tom’s younger sister and a school friend of Marion’s. Sylvie is more worldly than Marion, wearing makeup and dating earlier in life than her friend. Sylvie is eager to join the adult world but laments the impossibility of having a truly independent life of her own due to her gender. 

Roy 

A friend of Tom’s who later marries Sylvie. Although Marion finds Roy unintellectual and foolish, Sylvie finds him irresistible.    

Douglas Houghton 

Patrick’s boss and the head of the art gallery. Houghton is an upstanding family man who values tradition, although Patrick has heard rumors that Houghton was part of the gay social scene at Cambridge.  

Jackie Butters 

Patrick’s secretary at the gallery. Jackie is efficient, neat, and reserved.  

Michael 

Patrick’s lover before Tom, who ultimately commits suicide when his gay identity is exposed.  

Charlie 

A friend of Patrick’s who has given him advice about surviving as a gay person since they first met in school. Charlie is unashamed but practical about the necessity of secrecy.   

Bill Taylor 

Marion’s father, who finds Marion puzzling but cares for her.  

Mrs. Taylor 

Marion’s mother, who Marion finds somewhat mysterious but who clearly loves her.  

Beryl Burgess 

Tom’s mother, a nervous woman who allows her children more freedom than Marion’s parents do.  

Mr. Burgess 

Tom’s father, a shopkeeper who often disapproves of Tom.  

Patrick’s mother 

A 65-year-old woman in failing health but good spirits, who loves Patrick unconditionally. 

Laurence Cedric Coleman 

A nervous young man Patrick meets at the Argyle. Laurence is a petty thief who later testifies against Patrick.  

The Duchess of Argyle 

A waiter at the Argyle Hotel. The Duchess dresses flamboyantly, attracting derision and slurs in the street, but carries himself with great pride.  

Mrs. Esme Owens 

Michael’s landlady. At first she seems content to ignore Michael’s relationship with Patrick, but Patrick later suspects that she is responsible for Michael being outted.  

Dr. Russell 

Psychiatrist at Wormwood Scrubs prison. Dr. Russell is sympathetic to Patrick and others who have been imprisoned for consensual gay behavior.  

Bert  

The most powerful prisoner in D Hall of Wormwood Scrubs prison. He is initially Patrick’s protector.  

Miss Monkton 

Deputy head of Marion’s grammar school. She is concerned that Marion lacks the strength of character to become a teacher. 

