Chapter XII returns to London and the narrator’s musing on how George’s sisters—and some readers—find Amelia dull and wonder what George sees in her. The Misses Osborne, in truth, feel neglected by their brother. However, while George is rarely at home, he spends time about town with friends and is not always with Amelia, as his sisters believe. Since Amelia lives such a sheltered life, she spends all her energy thinking about her love for George and writing him long letters when his regiment is away from London. Amelia’s only concern for the war raging in Europe is whether it will force George to leave her.

George is embarrassed by all of Amelia’s letters. The men in the regiment don’t know he is engaged, and he has dalliances with other women. After Dobbin accidentally reveals Amelia’s existence to the men, he and George argue. George vows that once he is married, he will reform his ways. The next day he visits Amelia. Dobbin gives him money to buy her a gift, but George spends it on himself. The narrator interjects to point out that in love affairs usually one person loves and the other person accepts the love. That day Amelia and George talk of their future, and she dines at his home, where Mr. Osborne appears quite gruff. Afterward, the ladies retire to the drawing room. Meanwhile, Mr. Osborne asks George about his relationship with Amelia. Although the engagement was decided long ago by the parents, Mr. Osborne now questions it. He believes Mr. Sedley may be headed for a financial downturn, and unless Amelia has a dowry, the wedding is off. The next day George goes to the bank and sees Mr. Sedley, looking quite depressed, leaving the building.

Chapters XII and XIII return to Amelia and George’s love story, but taken out of the Sedley home, that love affair loses much of its luster and underscores a reality that everyone is aware of except for Amelia: Theirs is a match built on financial motivation. The narrator and readers are privy to details and secrets that Amelia is not: George spends his time gambling and womanizing, his sisters think Amelia is simple and dull, and George’s father will allow him to marry Amelia only if she provides a hefty dowry. Chapter XII touches on Amelia’s sheltered, protected life, which leads to her complete lack of awareness about these tensions. Even after the odd dinner at the Osbornes, when her heart was not at ease, she still writes George a letter of love. Amelia accepts George at face value. She is too good-hearted and I to imagine that anything foul lurks under the surface of their relationship.

These chapters also tell readers more about Dobbin, who is in love with Amelia himself. Dobbin chides George for his poor treatment of Amelia, and only Dobbin’s urging persuades George to take a break from his carousing and visit his fiancée. Even though George believes he is above Dobbin in social class, he still greatly respects Dobbin’s opinion and wants his approval. Just as George did when they were children, George recognizes the goodness in Dobbin and for a brief moment works harder to be like him. Ultimately, however, George always fails to live up to Dobbin’s ideals of him. George continually demonstrates good intentions only to veer off track wildly. His borrowing money from Dobbin to buy Amelia a present but instead buying himself a diamond shirt pin is a prime example of this tendency.

The end of Chapter XIII also reveals George’s fickleness. Is he pleased with the possibility that his father may call off his engagement to Amelia? Or does he now want her more because he may not be able to have her? The narrator fails to provide an answer but uses language that emphasizes George’s inclination to view everything in his life through the lens of how it impacts him. He can’t even think of Amelia’s confusion at the situation without getting sidetracked by thoughts of his painful hangover. To George, Amelia represents a sweet token and now that Mr. Osborne has attempted to take her away from him, George seems to want to win her even more.

