[Y]ou’ve gone beyond the probable and
						made us see the possible, but possible only through you. Because
						your figures are more devoid of contempt of humanity than any work
						I’ve ever seen.

Peter Keating is unhappy with the completed Cosmo-Slotnick
					building, but Toohey tells Keating to give up his ego if he wants
					to be great. Roark goes to find Stephen Mallory, the sculptor who
					tried to kill Toohey. Mallory is shocked by Roark’s interest in
					his work and cries with relief at the knowledge that uncompromising
					men like Roark exist. The following morning, Mallory visits Roark
					and looks at the sketches for the Stoddard temple. Mallory agrees
					to sculpt a statue of the human spirit for the temple. Roark suggests Dominique
					for a model.

	For the next few months, Roark works with brilliant intensity. He
					designs a horizontal temple, scaled to human height. He wants it to
					bring the sky down to man and allow visitors to find strength. 

In May, the corporation backing the Aquitania Hotel falls
					apart and construction is suspended. Kent Lansing promises Roark
					that one day he will finish the Aquitania. Stoddard abruptly cancels
					the imminent opening of the Stoddard Temple. The next day, Toohey writes
					a vicious criticism of the temple and Stoddard files suit against
					Roark for breach of contract and malpractice. Every newspaper in
					the city supports Stoddard. Toohey explains to Dominique that now
					people will remember Roark for botching a building. At the trial,
					many prominent architects in New York testify against Roark. Dominique
					testifies on Stoddard’s behalf, but actually defends Roark. She
					says the Stoddard Temple should be leveled because the world does
					not deserve it. Roark’s only defense is to submit ten photographs
					of the Stoddard Temple.

Stoddard wins the suit. For her next column, Dominique
					submits her trial testimony, over Alvah Scarret’s objections. Dominique threatens
					to quit if the article is not printed, and the paper’s owner, Gail
					Wynand, orders Scarret to fire Dominique. Meanwhile, Katie goes
					to Toohey for advice. She is utterly unhappy in her job as a social
					worker and is beginning to hate the people she is supposed to help.
					Toohey tells Katie to relinquish her ego. Katie meekly agrees. Keating
					bitterly regrets his testimony against Roark at the Stoddard trial.
					He tells Katie he wants to marry her right away and that they will
					elope the next day. After he leaves, Katie shouts at Toohey that she
					is not afraid of him anymore.

The same evening, Dominique asks Keating to marry her
					and he accepts. They drive to Connecticut and get married. That
					night, Dominique goes to Roark. After they make love, Dominique
					tells Roark for the first time that she loves him. She then tells
					him that she married Keating. Roark accepts the news quietly. Dominique
					tells Roark that she will punish herself by marrying Keating because
					she refuses to be happy in a world that does not appreciate Roark. Roark
					tells her that he loves her and will not stop her. He wants her whole
					and will wait for her to grow.

The next morning, Dominique moves into Keating’s apartment. Keating’s
					marriage is a sham, but he takes pleasure in the envy of other men.
					The Stoddard Temple is redesigned by a group of architects and converted
					into the Stoddard Home for Subnormal Children. After completing
					the Cord skyscraper, Roark cannot find any work. The Wall Street
					Crash of 1929 has
					nearly ruined the building trades, and no one wants to take a chance
					on a scandalous architect. One night Roark goes to see the altered
					temple. Toohey emerges, taunts Roark, and asks Roark what he thinks
					of him. Roark says he doesn’t think of Toohey at all.

The media is the most powerful and despicable public institution
					in The Fountainhead. Although Rand published her
					novel before television became ubiquitous, newspapers and magazines
					are omnipresent in the novel and reach everybody. Toohey exploits
					and manipulates the media to its full extent. His mediocrity prevents him
					from expressing himself through his own art or architecture, but
					he reaches the public and hurts Roark with his column in the Banner.
					Because the media shapes opinions and knowledge, Toohey at first
					hurts Roark simply by failing to write about him and thus keeping
					him from the public eye. But Toohey must switch strategies after
					Roark becomes known, and he begins using his newspaper column to
					launch an attack on Roark’s reputation.

	The extent of Toohey’s maliciousness becomes increasingly apparent
					in these chapters, as he manipulates Stoddard into hiring Roark,
					letting him begin the building, and then firing and suing him. Characters
					react to Toohey’s repulsiveness in different ways. Dominique thinks
					the horrible world deserves Toohey and his collectivist philosophy,
					and so she does not try to stop him. Stephen Mallory sees Toohey
					as the embodiment of the world’s brutal irrationality and tries
					to stop Toohey by shooting him. Howard Roark poses the greatest
					threat to Toohey and suffers the most at Toohey’s hands, and he
					reacts with cold indifference to the crazed columnist. When Toohey
					and Roark meet at Stoddard’s temple, Toohey expects the meeting
					to be a fiery clash between two powerful enemies. Instead, Toohey
					finds that Roark does not even think about him. Roark thinks of
					Toohey not as an equal, but as a distasteful nuisance. Roark’s ability
					to ignore Toohey confirms the latter’s mediocrity.

	Dominique and Keating form an unhappy union that contrasts with
					the idyllic marriage that earlier seems possible between Katie and
					Keating. Both Katie and Keating feel that they could make each other
					happy; Keating could protect Katie from Toohey and Katie could make
					Keating feel honest and pure. Yet Keating is too weak and greedy
					to know what is good for him. Dominique and Keating marry not to
					find happiness, but because Dominique wants to punish herself. She
					hates living in a world that does not understand Roark, and to fight
					successfully on Roark’s behalf would mean stooping to the tactics
					of the world she hates. The marriage frustrates Keating, who enjoys
					the congratulations of his friends but fears his wife’s cold indifference.

	Throughout The Fountainhead Rand illustrates
					Roark’s individuality and strength on conviction by highlighting
					his apathy toward or distaste for institutions. He gets expelled
					from the Stanton Institute of Technology because his designs are
					too modern and he is unwilling to conform to conventional standards.
					But this conservative reaction to his work does not faze him, and,
					wholly uninterested in working at a conventional design firm such
					as Francon & Heyer, he seeks to work for the individualistic
					Henry Cameron. Similarly, at the trial, in Chapter 12,
					Roark makes no attempt to put forth a defense that could actually
					win him the case. He does not care about the legal system or about
					triumphing in it; rather, he seeks only to defend the integrity
					of his work. He shows the same lack of concern for marriage; because
					he sees it as a meaningless formality, he feels no jealousy toward
					Keating about his marriage to Dominique and feels no compunction
					about committing adultery with her. He considers all value systems
					but his own utterly irrelevant. 

