Harry Potter became a household name in the Wizarding
				world when he was just a baby, after successfully warding off an
				attack by the infamous Lord Voldemort. Unfortunately, this same
				attack killed Harry’s parents, James and Lily Potter, who were members
				of an anti-Voldemort league called the Order of the Phoenix. No
				one knows exactly how or why Harry survived Voldemort’s attack,
				and many of his fellow Wizards are simultaneously impressed by and suspicious
				of Harry’s mysterious powers. Despite all this special attention,
				Harry is a kind and humble teenager, instinctually averse to flattery
				and excessive praise. He is loyal to his friends and to Dumbledore,
				and his placement in Gryffindor ensures that he’ll exhibit extreme
				bravery. Harry spends much of his time at Hogwarts trying to live
				up to his widespread reputation, and he often wishes that his life
				at school could be more normal. Now fifteen years old, Harry is
				experiencing the same emotions as any other fifteen-year-old boy.
				He gets angry and frustrated with his friends, is confused by girls,
				and often reacts unhappily to authority figures that try to impose
				limits on his behavior. Although Harry always has good, noble intentions,
				he can be impatient and overeager. Dumbledore continually stresses
				that education is achieved over time, and Harry does not always
				want to wait.

In Book V, we learn that Harry is the subject of a prophecy
				that claims Harry will eventually need to either destroy Voldemort
				or be destroyed by him. Harry’s connection to Voldemort is complex
				and often enigmatic. Harry’s infant encounter with Voldemort left
				him with a lightning-shaped scar, which he tries to conceal under
				his shaggy brown hair, and the scar burns whenever Voldemort is
				feeling any kind of powerful emotion. At various points in Book
				V, Voldemort uses this connection to invade Harry’s mind, appearing in
				his dreams and lending Harry his terrible impulses. Harry now must
				deal with Voldemort more intimately than he ever has before.

