Carlos returned from a trip to New York City with a surprise
					for his daughters. He promised he would show them the surprise if
					they finished their dinners first. Carla wanted a clue what the
					surprise might be, but she had to wait. Gladys, their maid, began
					singing a song about going to New York. Carla liked to hear her
					sing, though her mother thought she was just a poor ignorant black
					girl. Gladys set the table and invited Carla into the maids' room.
					Chucha and Gladys bickered for a moment, until Gladys started daydreaming
					about going to New York. She thought that the Statue of Liberty
					was an American version of the Virgin Mary, so she prayed to her
					every day. The black maids complained about their work and the endless
					presents the girls received. Carla did not mind having to clean
					her plate if she got to eat spaghetti and meatballs, and waited
					impatiently to learn about their surprises. Their mother got a bottle
					of her favorite perfume, and the girls got small iron statues. They
					didn't understand what they were for, but Yolanda's was a man in
					a boat next to a whale, Sandra's was a girl jumping rope, and Carla's
					was a girl staring at clouds. Their father said they were all the
					rage at FAO Schwarz. Then they realized that they were mechanical
					banks that moved when a coin was put into a slot. Gladys was allowed
					to put a coin into Carla's bank, making Mary rise toward the clouds
					with her arms uplifted. Carla brought the bank to school and got
					almost a dollar in pennies from other children. Her mother's friends
					and Gladys also often put pennies into the bank. Eventually it was
					forgotten and put away on a toy shelf.

Christmas decorations and preparations then held everyone's attention,
					and Gladys began singing Christmas carols instead of radio merengues. Carla
					got the baby doll she had wanted for Christmas, as well as other
					toys. The maids each got a wallet with a little money as a gift.
					Gladys offered to buy the bank with her Christmas money, but Carla
					thought she might get in trouble for selling a gift her father had
					brought her. Gladys offered to throw in the wallet she had gotten,
					and Carla felt sorry for her. Carla said she could keep the bank
					for free, and Gladys thanked her before bringing the bank to her
					room.

A few weeks later, her mother noticed the bank was missing
					from Carla's room. Carla told her mother she did not know where
					it was, and her mother decided to search the maids' room. Her employers interrogated
					Gladys, and then Carla admitted that she had given the bank away
					voluntarily. Her parents still felt that they could not trust Gladys,
					and she was pressured to leave the family. As Gladys left the house
					crying, Carla put a penny into the bank and it jammed, leaving Mary
					stuck between heaven and earth.

Carla's greed and materialism contrasts with Gladys's
					sincere desire to get ahead in life through hard work and frugality.
					Her ambition to make it to America, where a better job and way of
					life supposedly waits for her, reflects her faith and optimism.
					Her positive attitude also indicates innocence; since she does not
					understand what the Statue of Liberty symbolizes for Americans,
					nor does she understand the problems she could create for herself
					by taking Carla's statue.

The tragedy of this story is Carla's indifference toward
					the people who worked to improve the quality of her life under relatively exploitative
					working conditions. The bank symbolizes the crass materialism of
					the American dream, since it suggests that if you put money in,
					Mary will ascend to heaven, representing a spiritual and material
					fulfillment. The materialism of the American dream is contrasted
					by the sincerely hopeful attitudes of workers like Gladys, who are
					simply struggling to survive. The fact that the bank came from FAO
					Schwarz in New York lent it the allure of success and luxury. Carla
					disregarded this luxury once she became bored with it, indicating
					her spoiled and ungrateful attitude toward her privilege. Gladys,
					on the other hand, was willing to sacrifice her Christmas gifts
					to have a piece of that luxury.

The ease by which Carla got her friends and family to
					contribute pennies to her bank fund contrasts with the difficulty
					Gladys faced trying to earn a decent living, supporting herself
					independently, and getting ahead in life through a working class
					existence. Carla earned money for the bank just by being cute and
					coming from a privileged background. Gladys could not even buy her
					way toward her dreams, since her effort to buy the bank resulted
					in her unemployment. The fact that the bank gets stuck as Gladys
					leaves the house symbolizes the limitations of the American dream
					and the difficult position immigrants and workers face as they try
					to get ahead. They end up stuck between heaven and earth, just like
					Mary, trapped between what they hope to leave behind and what they
					hope to achieve.

This story seems to be less about Carla, a spoiled child
					who does not appreciate what she has been given through her family
					position and privilege, than about the general difficulties the
					working classes face when contemplating immigration. The author
					might intend the narration of Gladys's troubles to balance out her
					portrayal of the Dominican immigrant experience, since she devotes
					most of the novel to an unusually wealthy family.

