In Granton, Naomi often went to the swamp to hang out.
					One evening Stephen came along on his bicycle. She showed him a
					frog with a broken leg, and he told her to come home. She brought
					the frog with her, imagining that it might be a prince. Nakayama-sensei was
					at the house. Naomi says she doesn’t remember when she was told,
					though at this point in the narrative, we’re not sure what Naomi
					is referring to. She remembers going outside, gathering water and
					mud, and making a home for the frog in a glass bowl. She feeds the
					frog for weeks, until its leg heals and it escapes.

In 1951, the family moved to a
					house in town. Stephen worked on a cantata for a school production.
					Penny Barker, the daughter of the farmers for whom Naomi’s family
					worked, came to their house, probably to petition Stephen for a
					part, and Naomi told her that her father was dead. As soon as she
					said the words aloud, she felt sick.

Stephen said that Mother and Grandma must be dead, too.
					Aunt Emily had written hundreds of letters trying to find them,
					with no success. However, two letters in the package Emily sends
					to Obasan’s house in the present day concern a request for Mother’s readmission
					to Canada, which suggests that the sisters had been in contact.

After high school, Stephen went to the Royal Conservatory
					of Music in Toronto. There, he won a prize for a piano competition and
					toured Europe. He also spent time with Aunt Emily, whom Naomi hadn’t
					seen in twelve years at that point. When he came home to Granton
					from school, he was surly and quiet. He sometimes refused to eat
					Obasan’s food. During one of Stephen’s summer breaks, Aunt Emily
					came for a visit. She was warm to Naomi, but didn’t smile when she
					greeted Obasan. One night, Naomi hears the adults whispering about
					whether or not to tell the children something. Obasan prays, and
					Aunt Emily cries.

The cardboard folder Aunt Emily had on that mysterious
					night is included in her package. Earlier that day, Naomi had seen
					Obasan reading its contents with a magnifying glass.

Mr. Barker, the family’s former employer, comes over with
					his second wife, Vivian, to say he’s sorry for Obasan’s loss. Vivian reminds
					Naomi of the first Mrs. Barker, who didn’t want her daughter Penny
					playing with Stephen and Naomi. Through Vivian’s eyes, Naomi sees
					how cluttered and unappealing the house is. Mr. Baker asks after
					Stephen, but Naomi hasn’t seen him in eight years. The last time
					he came home, he brought a divorcée from Paris with him.

Obasan brings tea in dirty cups. Vivian seems ill at ease,
					and Naomi says she wishes she could banish the offensive smells
					and sights from the house. The Barkers ask if Obasan will be all
					right. Deaf, she does not answer them. Mr. Barker praises Uncle,
					whom he calls Sam, and says, “ ‘It was a terrible business, what
					we did to our Japanese.’ ”

Naomi thinks about the well-intentioned questions and
					comments she often gets about whether she likes Canada, how good
					her English is, and if she’s ever been “back” to Japan. She says
					she is from Canada. The fact that Obasan is not puts her in “silent
					territory,” beyond multiculturalism and racism.

While Chapter 31 intimates that
					Naomi’s father has died, we don’t find out for sure until Chapter 32.
					This uncertainty mirrors Naomi’s own refusal to comprehend her father’s
					death. Because the news is too staggering for her to take in, she
					shuts down. Instead of coming to grips with the death of her parent,
					she channels her attention toward the injured frog. This creature
					resembles the chicks and kittens of previous chapters in his helplessness
					and innocence, and becomes a receptacle for the love Naomi will
					no longer be able to express to her father. His recovery is bittersweet:
					It is a pleasant surprise, and shows the success of Naomi’s kind
					ministrations, but it also underlines Naomi’s powerlessness to bring
					back her father.

Chapter 34 features our first glimpse
					at an extended interaction between Naomi and white people since
					Rough Lock Bill saved her life at the lake. While many chapters
					have contained references to snubs, racist remarks, or the threat
					of physical violence, these references have been fleeting. Here
					we get a long look at an uncomfortable meeting of cultures. The
					interaction is particularly fraught because the Barkers employed
					Naomi’s family during the war years, which makes them directly responsible
					for the subhuman living conditions their employees suffered. Mr.
					Barker’s remark about the bad treatment of “our Japanese” is not
					only clichéd and offensive, it is dripping in unintentional irony.
					He fancies himself a kind man who has embraced multiculturalism,
					and perhaps he is. Even if his intentions are sterling, however,
					that does not erase the fact that his pleasantry about the poor
					treatment of Japanese Canadians grossly understates his own part
					in that poor treatment.

Chapter 34 suggests that good intentions
					are not enough. It is nice of the Barkers to pay their condolences,
					but their behavior once they get to Obasan’s house undermines their
					kind gesture. Mr. Barker hollers at Obasan in broken English, as
					if she will understand bad grammar more easily; Vivian perches on
					the edge of her seat as if loath to touch the furniture; both seem
					ill at ease. Similarly, the good intentions of people who ask Naomi
					whether she likes Canada, among other questions, do not excuse their
					cluelessness.

Naomi reacts with irritation to the Barkers, just as she
					does to the offensive questions. When she says she wishes she could
					erase the unfamiliar smells of Japanese food from the house, or
					see the dust she and Obasan are too short to see, she is being sarcastic
					and displaying her frustration with the stereotypical thinking of
					white Canadians. But if anything, her reaction is remarkably measured. She
					wonders if perhaps Vivian is being solicitous, rather than just condescending.
					She assumes that even her rudest interlocutors have kindness in
					their hearts.

Naomi sees Obasan’s identity as less complex and tortured
					than her own. Naomi herself is Canadian through and through—but
					she faces a constant barrage of questions about her nationality.
					Her self-image doesn’t match the way many of her fellow Canadians
					perceive her, and frustration is the result. As Naomi sees it, Obasan doesn’t
					face the same kind of problems. She is what people assume Naomi
					is: originally from Japan. That fact, and her silence, makes her
					inviolate.

