After the death of Moses, God calls on Joshua to lead
					the Israelites across the Jordan River and take possession of the
					promised land. God guarantees victory in the military campaign
					and vows never to leave the Israelites so long as they obey his
					laws. The people swear their allegiance to Joshua, and he sends
					two spies across the river to investigate the territory. The men
					enter Jericho, where a prostitute named Rahab hides them in her
					home and lies to the city officials regarding the spies’ presence.
					Rahab tells the spies that the Canaanites are afraid of Israel and
					its miraculous successes. Professing belief in the God of the Israelites,
					she asks for protection for her family when the Israelites destroy
					Jericho. The spies pledge to preserve Rahab and return to Joshua,
					telling him of the weakened condition of Israel’s enemies.

The Israelites cross the Jordan River, led by a team
					of priests carrying the Ark of the Covenant. As the priests enter
					the water, the flow of the river stops and the Israelites cross
					the river on dry land. Arriving on the other side, the Israelites
					commemorate the miracle with an altar of twelve stones from the
					river bed (representing the twelve tribes of Israel). The people
					begin to eat the produce of the new land—thus halting the daily
					supply of manna—and the Israelite men perform the ritual of circumcision
					in preparation for battle.

Approaching Jericho, Joshua encounters a mysterious man
					who explains that he is the commander of God’s army but that he
					is neither for nor against Israel. Joshua pays homage to the man
					and passes on. Following divine instructions, Joshua leads the Israelites in
					carrying the Ark around Jericho for six days. On the seventh day, the
					Israelites march around the city seven times. Joshua rallies them to
					conquer the city and kill everyone except for Rahab. They are to refrain
					from taking any of the city’s religious items. At the sound of the
					Israelite war cry, the walls of Jericho collapse, and the Israelites destroy
					the city and its inhabitants.

Joshua’s fame spreads throughout the land, but
					the Israelites are humiliated in their attempts to take the next
					city, Ai. God attributes the disaster to the disobedience of Achan,
					an Israelite who has stolen religious items from Jericho. After
					the people stone Achan, the renewed attempt against Ai is successful
					as Joshua masterminds an elaborate ambush against the city’s forces.
					The Israelites celebrate by erecting an altar to God and publicly
					reaffirming their commitment to God’s law.

Fearful of the marauding Israelites, the people
					of Gibeon visit the Israelite camp in disguise, claiming to be travelers
					in the land and requesting peace with Israel. Joshua does not inquire
					with God and makes a hasty treaty with the men, only to discover
					later that the Gibeonites are natives of the land to be conquered.
					The Israelites refrain from attacking the city, but five other local
					kings attack Gibeon for making peace with Israel. The Israelites
					come to Gibeon’s aid and destroy the five armies. Joshua helps by
					commanding God to make the sun stand still during the fight. God
					listens and stops the sun’s movement—the only time in history, we
					are told, when God obeys a human.

The Israelites continue to destroy the southern
					and northern cities of Canaan, killing all living inhabitants, as
					God has stipulated. While much of the promised land still remains
					to be conquered, the people of Israel begin to settle in the land,
					dividing it amongst the twelve tribes. After God gives Israel rest
					from its enemies for many years, an ailing Joshua makes a farewell
					pronouncement to the nation of Israel. Joshua goads the Israelites
					to be strong and to obey all of God’s laws, throwing away any idols
					and refraining from intermarriage with the native people. The people
					assure Joshua they will be faithful to the covenant, but Joshua
					reluctantly accepts this assurance, worried that obedience for Israel
					will prove quite difficult.

Scholars dispute the historical accuracy of the
					Book of Joshua. Although the writer claims to be writing in the
					thirteenth century b.c., it is unlikely that
					Joshua was written that early, and it is unlikely that the conquest
					of Palestine by the Hebrew people was as clean and neat as the first
					twelve chapters of Joshua suggest. Some scholars choose to read
					the book not as an inaccurate record of history but as an accurate record
					of Hebrew cultural memory of the original invasion of Palestine by
					the wandering Israelites. Unlike Genesis and Exodus, Joshua contains
					detailed accounts of political and military battles, and more than half
					of the book is devoted to listing the allotment of land to each
					of the twelve tribes. Few of the characters are as dramatic as those
					in the first books of the Old Testament, and God interferes little
					with human lives. In this sense, Joshua reads more like an ancient
					Hebrew history textbook than a collection of separate myths and
					legends.

The Book of Joshua carefully structures its description
					of the invasion of Palestine. The strict organization of the book
					emphasizes that the description of the conquests is a literary interpretation, and
					shows the importance within this interpretation of the idea of land.
					Israel’s conquest is divided into two parts: the first twelve chapters
					tell the story of the conquest itself, and the final twelve chapters
					tell the story of how the land was allotted. These two sections
					are each subdivided into two sections. In these four parts, Israel
					prepares for the conquest, the campaigns themselves are carried
					out, the conquered land is allotted, and a concluding section exhorts
					Israel to remain loyal to God. The geographic organization of the
					book is equally rigorous; both the conquests and the division of
					lands are grouped according to whether the lands are in the north, south,
					east, or west. In the process, the idea of land plays a role as antagonistic
					as any character’s. Various people’s desire for and loyalty to specific
					regions is a source of great conflict, and God’s covenant with Israel
					is physically manifested in his promise of land.

The Book of Joshua describes Joshua as an echo
					of Moses who engages in the same actions, only of lesser magnitude
					and with lesser effect. Moses leads the Israelites out of their
					oppression in Egypt; Joshua leads them into their domination of
					Canaan. Furthermore, Joshua causes the Jordan River to run dry in
					the same way that Moses parts the Red Sea. Finally, both Joshua
					and Moses perform similar administrative actions, sending out spies
					and allotting land to tribes. However, the differences between Moses’s
					and Joshua’s stories almost always indicate that Moses was a grander
					leader and prophet. While Moses communes directly with God, speaking
					with him face to face as though to a friend, God’s presence in the
					Book of Joshua is largely symbolic. God exists for them in the Ark
					of the Covenant, a container that contains the text of Mosaic law.
					He does not, however, take physical form. Moses both foreshadows
					and overshadows Joshua.

This simplified rendering of the military campaign is
					contrasted by a lingering ambivalence in the behavior and the future
					of the Israelite people throughout Joshua. Rahab may display a blind
					faith in God, and the treaty with the Gibeonites may be the result
					of a deception, but by sparing these figures the Israelites disobey
					God’s ongoing commandment to destroy all the native inhabitants
					of the promised land. Equally perplexing is the man or angel who
					is “the commander of the army of the Lord.” He claims to be neither
					for nor against Israel, yet his presence at the battle of Jericho
					seems to connote God’s blessing on Israel’s military exercises.
					The ten chapters describing the allotment of tribal lands also undercut
					the decisive victories depicted in the first half of the book. Israel’s resettlement
					is a project of enormous proportions, occurring before all the land
					has even been conquered. In fact, it is not clear if the remaining
					lands will ever be conquered; but, although God requires the total
					conquest of the promised land, he nevertheless gives them rest from
					battle (23:1). Finally, in his farewell to Israel, Joshua commands the people to throw away
					their religious idols and to refrain from allying with the native
					peoples. At no point do the people agree to either stipulation.
					Instead, they merely affirm that they will serve God (24:18, 24).
					Paradoxically, Joshua responds, “You cannot serve the Lord, for
					he is a holy God” (24:19). The ambivalence of the people regarding obedience to God in light
					of Joshua’s persistence suggests that the future of Israel is uncertain
					at best.

