“Can you make yourself love? Can you
						make yourself be loved?”

Lena’s grandparents’ house is painted blue with a yellow
					front door. Lena and Effie are dazed and irritable from jetlag.
					Grandma’s English is good, but Grandpa’s is nonexistent. Lena doesn’t
					speak Greek, but she wishes she did. Her bedroom has a beautiful
					view of the Caldera. Lena barely knows her grandparents, but the
					view makes her feel at home.

Tibby goes through orientation at Wallman’s and meets
					her boss, Duncan Howe. She finds the whole thing ridiculous but
					also valuable material for her documentary, which she calls a “suckumentary.”
					She meets a saleswoman with long fingernails, then tries to set up
					a deodorant display. She can’t figure out the cardboard pyramid, so
					she borrows some tape from the store. At the end of her shift, the door
					alarm beeps her back inside—the store’s tape is still in her pocket.
					Duncan accuses her of stealing but gives her a second chance.

In a letter to Carmen, Lena says her fantasies about her
					grandparents don’t match reality. She admits she doesn’t yet love
					them.

“There is no such thing as fun for the
						whole family.”

Lena tries to paint the sunset, but she can’t capture
					it exactly. Her grandparents cook an elaborate meal, and Lena decides
					to wear the Pants to dinner. Effie helps Grandma cook. Even though
					Lena is the more beautiful of the two sisters, people always like
					Effie better, because she’s more extroverted. Grandma tells Lena
					to put on something nicer, since she’s invited a “nice boy” named
					Kostos to the party. Lena dreads another set-up.

At the airport, Carmen’s father, Albert, gives her a huge
					hug. Albert asks after her mother, but he isn’t really interested.
					They retrieve Carmen’s luggage. In the car, Carmen tells Albert
					about her grades in school and about her tennis lessons. He promises
					her they’ll play. She notices that Albert looks different—more put together.
					They pull up in front of a large house, and Albert reveals that
					he moved out of his apartment a month ago and that a lot has changed.
					Inside, Carmen meets a woman named Lydia, a teenage girl named Krista,
					and an eighteen-year-old boy named Paul. Albert introduces them
					as his fiancée and future stepchildren. Carmen, reeling, follows
					Albert to the guest room. She is unable to tell Albert how surprised
					and angry she is. She writes to Bridget to tell her that the “summer
					of Carmen and Al” is much different than she’d planned.

Both Lena and Carmen find themselves in awkward family
					situations this summer, surrounded by people whom they are expected
					to love but who, to them, are little more than strangers. Lena has grown
					up hearing stories about her wonderful grandparents, and she expected
					to feel an instant bond with the grandmother she’d heard was so
					beautiful and the grandfather she’d been told was so excellent in
					business. Her grandparents had taken on superhuman qualities in
					her imagination. When she is faced with her real grandparents—two
					ordinary old people—Lena feels little connection. She knows you’re
					supposed to love your family, but these people don’t feel like family—they
					feel like strangers. Carmen struggles with a similar problem. However,
					the new “family” she confronts is actually composed of strangers,
					a woman and two teenagers she’s never seen or heard about before.
					Her father loves them, and he also loves Carmen. Albert seems to
					think that this love can transfer easily so that the whole group
					will feel connected. In reality, Carmen feels excluded from this
					new family circle, a stranger even around her father, whom she loves
					dearly but now cannot understand.

Tibby, with her nose ring and baggy clothes, seems to
					believe that she can understand people just by looking at them.
					But when Duncan judges Tibby based on her appearance and accuses
					her of stealing, she fails to see the error of her own ways. Tibby
					assumes that her summer is going to be terrible and that she’ll
					be surrounded by stupid, ridiculous people at Wallman’s. She is
					so convinced of her fate that she decides to make her “suckumentary”
					to document the horribleness of her experiences. When she meets
					Duncan, with his officious, managerial manner and adherence to Wallman’s
					rules, she immediately judges him to be a worthy star of her film.
					She never considers that there is more to Duncan than what meets
					the eye. Similarly, she deems the saleswoman with the long fingernails
					ridiculous, assuming that the fingernails reveal the woman’s inner
					self. These quick judgments are Tibby’s habit, but she doesn’t appreciate when
					this practice is turned on herself. She isn’t trying to steal from Wallman’s;
					she’d put the tape in her smock pocket accidentally. But Duncan
					doesn’t look past what he sees: a teenager with a nose ring trying
					to leave the store without paying for merchandise. The lesson seems
					clear, but Tibby sees this error as simply more insanity on Duncan’s
					part.

