Upon the news of Natasha and Andrew’s engagement and the
					death of his Masonic benefactor Bazdeev, Pierre loses interest in
					his life and becomes depressed, abandoning his Masonic activities.
					He moves to Moscow, but does little besides read and party. He feels disappointed
					in himself and in the world of falsity around him. 

Meanwhile, old Prince Bolkonski also moves his household
					to Moscow. The anti-French sentiment prevalent in the city puts
					him in the center of the opposition to the government. He is more
					crotchety than ever, and is growing senile and forgetful. Mary regrets
					the move. She feels isolated, is alienated by her friend Julie’s
					whirlwind social life, and misses the visits from the religious
					pilgrims. Mary becomes irritable in her lessons with her little
					nephew. Despite her promise to Andrew to prepare their father for
					Andrew’s marriage to Natasha, Mary is afraid to bring up the subject.

The old Prince Bolkonski continues to show great affection toward
					Mademoiselle Bourienne, whom he may seriously consider marrying.
					He churlishly kicks out of his house a renowned French doctor who
					has been sent to care for him, accusing the man of being a spy.
					The prince continues to socialize with old acquaintances, imposing
					his spy stories and his anti-French ideas upon them.

Pierre warns Mary that Boris is paying court to her in
					hopes of winning her heiress’s fortune in marriage—just as he is
					with Julie. Mary confides to Pierre her wish to marry anyone in
					order to escape her overcritical father. Boris, while preferring
					Mary to Julie, is pushed to propose to the artificial and aging
					Julie, due to a threat that Anatole Kuragin will propose if Boris
					does not. Julie delightedly accepts Boris’s proposal, and the wedding
					plans are announced.

Count Rostov, accompanied by Sonya and Natasha, goes to Moscow
					to complete the sale of Otradnoe, to order Natasha’s wedding trousseau,
					and to present Natasha to Andrew, who is expected soon. As their
					home is unheated, the Rostovs stay with their old friend Marya Dmitrievna,
					who helps Natasha select wedding clothes and gives her advice on
					how to handle her future father-in-law. The next day, Count Rostov
					takes Natasha to visit the old Prince Bolkonski. Despite her self-confidence,
					Natasha is wary. Princess Mary takes an instant dislike to Natasha,
					whom she views as frivolous, and the prince grumpily refuses to
					meet with the Rostovs. Natasha, for her part, finds Mary dry and
					boring. After a long silence, Mary forces herself to wish Natasha
					well, but both women feel the falseness of the words. Natasha leaves,
					and cries about the meeting.

At the opera that evening, Natasha muses that everything
					would be fine if only Andrew returned. She sees Boris, Julie, and
					Helene, and is conscious that all of them are staring at her. Natasha
					turns her attention to the opera, but Anatole Kuragin addresses
					her, eyeing her shoulders with interest. Natasha is agitated, and
					tries to watch the opera but sees only absurd falsity in it.

The spendthrift Anatole has been sent to Moscow in the
					hopes that he will moderate his expenditures and find an heiress
					wife. He lives a thoughtless and selfish life, hiding the fact that
					he is secretly married, and goes around in the company of Dolokhov.
					Anatole is attracted to Natasha, and Natasha is vaguely interested
					in Anatole as well, though she still waits for Andrew’s return.
					Helene visits Natasha, pays compliments that make Natasha love her,
					and invites Natasha to a gathering at which Anatole will be present.
					At Helene’s party, full of disreputable people, Anatole dances with
					Natasha and tells her he loves her madly. That night, Natasha is
					tormented by doubt as to whether she loves Andrew or Anatole, feeling
					she loves them both.

The Rostovs’ hostess, Marya Dmitrievna, decides it best
					for the Rostovs to return to Otradnoe in order to avoid fighting
					with the irritable old Prince Bolkonski. Natasha is upset, especially
					when she receives a letter from Mary begging forgiveness for her
					rudeness, and another from Anatole declaring love. Natasha decides
					she loves Anatole. While Natasha sleeps, Sonya reads Anatole’s love
					letter to Natasha, questions her, and threatens to reveal the secret
					love. Natasha becomes angry with Sonya and affirms her feelings
					for Anatole, resolving to break off the engagement with Andrew and elope
					with Anatole. Anatole and Dolokhov obtain money and horses for the
					elopement. But at the moment of departure, a footman arrives and
					orders Anatole to be brought to Marya Dmitrievna to forestall the
					elopement. Anatole barely escapes. Marya Dmitrievna is furious with
					Natasha for carrying on with Anatole in her own house, but she promises
					not to tell Count Rostov about the elopement plans. Pierre is summoned
					to Marya Dmitrievna’s house and is told of Anatole’s plans.

Pierre informs everyone at the house that Anatole is already
					married to a girl in Poland. The enraged Pierre hunts down Anatole
					and orders him out of Moscow immediately. Anatole is indignant,
					but leaves the next day. Natasha falls ill, and is discovered to
					have attempted to poison herself. Pierre visits Andrew, who is back
					in Moscow. Andrew’s connections with Speranski are finished, as Speranski
					has recently fallen from grace, accused of treachery and forced
					into exile.

Andrew returns Natasha’s portrait, absolutely refusing
					to forgive her for entertaining thoughts of elopement with Anatole. Andrew
					assigns Pierre the task of telling Natasha that Andrew has rejected
					her. Pierre visits Natasha, but she already knows the news he is
					delivering. She is full of self-blame. Pierre is tender toward Natasha.
					He watches the comet of 1812 with a sense
					of a new life blossoming.

On June 12, 1812, the French forces
					cross Russia’s frontiers. The narrator explores the question of
					what caused this invasion, disagreeing with the historians’ answers
					to this problem. The invasion, the narrator argues, comes about
					not because of diplomatic errors or strategic decisions alone, but
					because of a coincidence of millions of small causal events. Even
					the great leaders Napoleon and Alexander are not responsible for
					the events of 1812. Like all men, they imagine
					themselves acting independently, but are really the slaves of circumstance.
					There is, therefore, no rational explanation for history.

In Prussia, Napoleon prepares to head eastward, and the
					sight of him inspires Polish officers to a suicidal plunge into
					the river, hoping to impress him. Forty officers die during this
					feat. Meanwhile, on the Russian side, confusion reigns at Vilna,
					and no defense strategy has yet been chosen. The tsar attends a
					ball his aides have thrown, at which Helene and Boris, now rich
					and powerful, are present.

The tsar writes Napoleon a polite note asking whether
					Napoleon’s crossing of the Niemen River is indeed intended as an
					act of invasion. The tsar sends General Balashev on a diplomatic
					mission to deliver the note. On his way, Balashev meets the French
					commander Murat, and during their discussion, each side claims that the
					other is the aggressor in the war. Upon reaching Napoleon’s camp,
					Balashev is surprised at the rude treatment he receives from the
					French soldiers and Napoleon’s chief of war, Davout. Napoleon summons
					Balashev for a meeting at which Napoleon talks incessantly, irrationally
					attempting to justify France’s invasion and trying to impress Balashev
					with the French army’s superiority. Napoleon is utterly convinced
					by the lies he utters. Later, Napoleon invites Balashev to dinner
					and is cordial toward him.

Andrew goes to St. Petersburg, receives an appointment
					on Kutuzov’s staff, and unsuccessfully attempts to challenge Anatole
					Kuragin to a duel for his plans to elope with Natasha. After some
					military service in Turkey, Andrew asks General Kutuzov for a transfer
					to the western front. On the way, Andrew stops at Bald Hills, where
					he finds everyone unchanged except for his young son, who is quickly growing
					up. Still aware of Prince Bolkonski’s mistreatment of Mary, Andrew
					speaks to his father and blames Mademoiselle Bourienne for stirring
					up discord between father and daughter. The old prince tells Andrew
					to leave, and Andrew does so without reconciling with his father.
					Mary urges Andrew to forgive their father, saying that men are never
					to blame and that evils come from heaven.

On the western front, Andrew encounters massive confusion, with
					hard-nosed strategists opposing proponents of bold action, and both
					groups opposing the majority that simply wants a situation beneficial
					to them. Andrew is summoned to meet with the tsar and his military
					advisors, who disagree in a hodgepodge of European languages. When
					Andrew’s opinion is requested, he responds that he does not know
					enough to offer one, which angers the advisors. When the tsar asks
					Andrew where he would like to serve, Andrew irrevocably loses favor
					by stating his preference to serve in the army instead of remaining
					with the tsar.

The Rostovs write letters to Nicholas on the front, imploring
					him to come home. He replies to these letters, and separately to
					Sonya as well, that honor must keep him serving in the army in wartime. Nicholas’s
					regiment moves into Poland with great excitement. A devoted young
					officer named Ilyin serves Nicholas, and invites him one rainy day
					to take shelter in a nearby tavern. At the tavern, Ilyin tempts
					Nicholas by telling him that a certain Mary Hendrikhovna—on whom
					Nicholas has a crush—is present.

In the tavern, all the officers are in love with Mary
					Hendrikhovna, the beautiful wife of an army doctor. The men jokingly
					flirt with her even in the presence of her beleaguered husband.
					Early in the morning, on his way back to the regiment from the tavern,
					Nicholas is roused by the sound of gunfire. He knows that the battle
					has begun. Seeing an opportunity for attack, Nicholas speaks to
					his commander, but rushes into a charge on the French before an
					order has been given. He cuts the arm of a French soldier, who instantly
					surrenders in fear. Nicholas is recommended for military honors,
					but inwardly he is disappointed that his alleged heroism means only
					that someone else is more scared than he is.

In Moscow, the Rostovs are troubled by the fact that Natasha has
					been ill. Expensive doctors are called, and they have diverging medical
					opinions. Though family and patient alike are relieved by the show
					of medical attention, the real cause of Natasha’s malady is her
					hurt feelings, not any physical ailment. Gradually she begins to improve,
					though she is not happy and feels no urge to sing or laugh as before.
					Natasha takes solace only in Pierre’s visits and caring company,
					and in a new religious devotion she has developed under the influence
					of Agrafena, a visiting neighbor. As news of Russia’s dire military
					situation spreads through Moscow, with rumors that only a miracle
					can save the nation, the Rostovs go to church. Natasha is aware
					that people are talking about her. She prays and feels the joyful
					possibility of a new and better life for herself. The liturgy affects
					Natasha greatly, and she feels that God has heard her prayer.

Pierre, meanwhile, is deeply pleased by his visits to
					Natasha, feeling a new vitality within himself. Applying a secret
					code the Masons revealed to him, he prophetically predicts that
					Napoleon is the Antichrist and will be defeated by the tsar in 1812,
					under Pierre’s leadership. Pierre, visiting the Rostovs to inform
					them that Nicholas has received military honors, finds Natasha much
					improved in spirits. The tsar makes an appeal to Muscovites, asking
					for sacrifices to save the country. Sonya reads the tsar’s appeal
					out loud to the Rostovs. The count declares that no sacrifice is
					too great. Natasha’s younger brother, Petya, declares his wish to
					enter the army. When his father resists, Petya cries. Meanwhile,
					the developing love between Natasha and Pierre is becoming increasingly
					clear to both of them. The next morning, Petya sets off for the
					Kremlin to join the hussars. Amid the crushing crowds, Petya is
					overjoyed to glimpse the tsar and becomes even more determined to
					join the army.

Pierre attends a conference of noblemen that has gathered
					to reply to the tsar’s appeal for aid. Against loud avowals of patriotism,
					Pierre speaks out in favor of practical strategy. The crowd is irrational,
					approving oversimplified versions of the Russian crisis and ignoring
					Pierre’s voice of reason. The tsar enters the hall and addresses
					the noblemen, sincerely thanking them for their loyalty. The noblemen
					and merchants weep in devotion to their leader, offering him everything
					they have. Count Rostov goes off to enroll Petya in the army, abandoning
					his earlier opposition. Even Pierre, swept away by patriotic emotion,
					feels ashamed of his earlier rational comments.

Natasha’s romantic woes in these sections bring about
					a great deal of change in her character. Up to this point, she has
					always been a child of nature, carefree and happy, falling in love
					with man after man with childlike innocence. With Andrew’s departure
					for Europe, however, Natasha is forced to see love not as a carefree
					joy, but as a test. As time passes, she becomes less able to assure
					herself that a year of waiting will make no difference to her commitment
					to Andrew—and her infatuation with Anatole Kuragin destroys that commitment
					entirely. In Anatole’s so-called love for Natasha, Tolstoy shows
					us that love may not be an obvious emotional state, but may also
					be an illusion. We also see this illusory nature of love in Nicholas’s
					crush on Mary Hendrikhovna. Though Nicholas appears to have real
					affection for Mary Hendrikhovna, we see that all the officers have
					crushes on her, simply because they are starved for female companionship—not
					because of any real or lasting love. In this manner, Tolstoy establishes
					love as yet another ideal, like patriotism or religious faith, that
					comes into question as War and Peace unfolds.

Tolstoy also uses these chapters to explore the unpredictable
					irrationality of historical events, which becomes a symbol of the
					absurdity of human existence. The narrator makes an unusual direct
					aside to us, explaining that it is not great men who make history,
					but rather a vast network of tiny chains of cause and effect that
					no one, even emperors, can control. We see that neither Napoleon
					nor Tsar Alexander is in full control of the military situation.
					Both leaders, swept along by events as they unfold, are merely doing
					their best to pretend to be in control. The tsar’s military advisors
					can agree on nothing, and the Russian and French commanders disagree
					about which side is the aggressor in the war. Moreover, Tolstoy
					implies that what is true in war is true in all human endeavors.
					Even the best laid plans end up having no importance, as Andrew
					learns when all his work in developing a new civil code is rendered
					worthless for purely random reasons. Speranski’s sudden and unexplainable
					fall from grace, due to vague allegations of treachery, similarly
					invalidates all of Speranski’s work. In an unpredictable world,
					the most successful may be those who follow their instincts of the
					moment, like Nicholas when he rushes into battle without waiting
					for orders.

The intriguing character of Napoleon offers us a surprising,
					up-close portrait of the leader as an egomaniac. Contrary to our
					expectations, Napoleon is not gifted with superior rational powers.
					His stream of chitchat with the Russian General Balashev, steamrollering
					over his conversation partner in a way that leaves no room for contradiction
					or questioning, is based almost exclusively on outright lies. Napoleon
					claims the Poles as his allies, for instance, all the while knowing
					this assertion to be untrue. Napoleon’s genius lies not in his powers
					of reason, but in his conviction that he is absolutely right in
					all matters. He ends his conference with Balashev by mentally communicating
					to the latter “I have convinced you”—indicating the irrational self-confidence
					that seems to be the primary secret behind his stellar success at
					world domination. More broadly, Tolstoy uses Napoleon’s brand of
					authoritative falsehood to bring to the forefront the broader issue
					of the subjectivity of reality. If Napoleon is so effectively able
					to impose his views of reality upon others, we wonder who else in
					the novel is doing the same.

