Constables bring Macheath into the death cell at the jail.
					The time is 5:04 a.m.
					The constables say that Macheath will be hanged at 6 a.m.
					One of the constables mentions that a huge crowd is forming around
					the jail. At this rate no one will be there to see the queen’s coronation
					at 7 a.m., because they will all be at Macheath’s
					hanging. The constables lock Macheath’s cell, and then Brown enters.
					Without looking at Macheath, he tells Constable Smith that he wants nothing
					to do with Macheath’s hanging. He exits.

As soon as he is gone, Macheath breaks into an elegant
					plea to one of the constables, Smith. Macheath tells Smith he will
					not say a word about bribery; he just wants to know how much it
					might cost for him to buy his freedom. He tells Smith to think it
					over. Smith tells Macheath that Macheath is talking nonsense, but
					Smith listens carefully. After Macheath sings of the bribery, Smith
					leaves.

Alone, Macheath sings a single stanza from “Call from
					the Grave,” pleading for help before it is too late. Matthew and
					Jacob appear. The time is now 5:25.
					Macheath asks whether they can get four hundred pounds. Jacob says
					that is everything they have left in the bank, and Macheath protests
					that he is the one being hanged. Matthew tells Macheath he should
					have been out of town anyway. Smith sticks his head in to ask what
					Macheath wants for his final meal, and Macheath answers that he
					wants asparagus. Macheath prevails upon his men to run out and get
					as much money as they can.

Smith re-enters and asks how much money Macheath can get. Macheath
					tells him four hundred pounds, and Smith shrugs noncommittally.
					As Smith exits, Macheath calls after him that he wants to speak
					with Brown. Macheath sings another stanza from “Call from the Grave,”
					now even more desperately calling for aid.

Polly shows up to visit Macheath. He asks how she is holding
					up, and she says the business is doing very well. She begins to
					ask all the questions she has never asked him, but he cuts her off
					to ask for money. She says it is all gone off to the banks, like
					he ordered. She breaks down crying, and Smith pulls her away from
					the cell, asking whether Macheath has raised the money yet. She
					exits, asking Macheath to never forget her.

Brown and Smith bring a table in to Macheath with his
					asparagus on it. Macheath acts coldly toward Brown. He asks Brown
					to go over their accounts, the tally of the bribes that Macheath
					owes him. Brown is despondent, but he takes out the account book.
					As soon as he does, Macheath is furious that Brown would expect
					money from his friend who is about to be hanged. Macheath insists
					on a full detailed bill. Offstage the sound of men working on the
					gallows can be heard.

Brown begins going over their accounts. With each item,
					he grows more despairing, while Macheath remains cold and cruel. Macheath
					even quotes a line from the duet the two men shared back in Act
					I, scene II, about their great friendship. Overwhelmed, Brown runs
					from the cell. He tells Smith to release Macheath from the cell for
					the hanging. Smith approaches Macheath and asks again whether he
					has the money yet. He can only release him if he gets the money
					now. Macheath says he has to wait until Matthew and Jacob come back.
					Smith says they have not shown up, so they do not have a deal.

People are admitted for the hanging. All the characters
					from the play are there. Peachum introduces himself to Macheath
					and says that Macheath was never a noble man. Matthew and Jacob
					come forward and say they could not get through to the bank because
					of the crowd outside. Macheath cuts them off and asks about how
					the men are positioned for their crimes during the coronation. Matthew says
					they are all in good spots and that they send their best wishes.

The time is now 6 a.m. Smith opens
					Macheath’s cell to walk him to the gallows. Macheath gives his last
					speech. He describes himself as a citizen of a lower-class social
					group at a time when robbery is being increasingly monopolized by
					the big corporations and banks. He compares his tools with those
					of the great engines of industry and finds that his robbery cannot
					measure up. The speech ends with Macheath thanking everyone for
					coming.

His speech finished, Macheath sings the “Ballad in which Macheath
					Begs Pardon of All.” At the beginning of the song, Macheath says
					that people should not judge him too harshly and asks that God forgive
					his sins. In the second stanza, the tone begins to shift as he sings
					about how crows will peck away his eyes and how his downfall was
					brought about by the greed and cruelty of those around him. He asks
					for forgiveness for everyone’s sins, not just his own. In the third
					stanza, he describes the sins of the whores, robbers, and pimps
					that make up his world and asks for their forgiveness. The same
					courtesy does not go out to the police who stymied him, though.
					In the fourth stanza, Macheath calls on God to kill the police,
					but he realizes that he will never save his soul that way. Upon
					asking for their forgiveness, he immediately takes it back, singing
					that someone should beat them with a crowbar. Then Macheath asks
					once more for forgiveness.

Smith leads the procession to the gallows. When Macheath arrives
					at the top of the scaffold, Smith tells the audience that they will
					hang Macheath by the neck. Then, Peachum suddenly steps out of character,
					telling the audience that they do not want to offend anyone and
					adds that they decided to end the play differently. He announces
					that a royal official will now appear on a horse.

During the finale, Brown appears on horseback as a royal
					messenger. He carries a special order from the queen that Macheath
					be freed and made a nobleman. All cheer. Macheath is relieved, and Polly
					is delighted. Mrs. Peachum, also out of character now, says how
					nice it would be if saviors on horseback always came. Peachum asks
					everyone to join in a hymn for the poorest of the poor. No one comes
					to save the poor, he says, and they have no choice but to fight back
					against a society that oppresses them. The whole group comes forward,
					singing a short stanza asking that injustice be spared from persecution
					and that everyone keep in mind the darkness of the world.

The final scene emphasizes the way material concerns and
					economics influence human life. Constable Smith makes it clear to Macheath
					that if he could get the money, Macheath would be a free man. Smith’s
					unwillingness to free Macheath without getting a bribe is not presented
					as cruelty but as a simple fact of life: No one gets anything for
					free. For his part, Macheath acknowledges that to free himself he
					would need to pay Smith. When he cannot come up with the money,
					he does not beg for mercy or bemoan his fate. Macheath accepts that
					punishment is inevitable for someone who cannot pay his way out
					of trouble. Macheath’s primary concern is still business. He forces
					Brown to go over their accounts to see what they owe one another.
					After Matthew and Jacob return from the bank empty-handed, he is
					more concerned about how the men are positioned to steal from the
					public for the coronation than about his own neck.

Macheath’s speech before he goes to the scaffold critiques
					the competitiveness of capitalism. Macheath compares the tools of
					his trade to those of banks and major corporations. Theft by physical force
					is nothing compared to theft by economic means. Macheath steals
					from only a few, while a bank steals from all by consolidating money
					and power into the hands of the rich. Macheath may be a murderer,
					but that role is nowhere near as bad as being an employer. This
					comparison portrays Macheath as the ironic hero because he commits
					crimes against fewer people than does Peachum or the rest of society.
					The implication is that employment brutalizes and exploits people
					far more than even murder.

The play’s radicalism can be seen in the conflict between
					justice and humanity. These two principles are normally considered
					to be in harmony in a good society: Humans are just by nature. Here, however,
					Macheath’s crimes are presented as natural outgrowths of a capitalist
					society. Money also allows people to skirt justice, as when Macheath
					almost bribes his way out of jail. Justice would mean killing Macheath
					for his crimes. But, according to Brecht, in a capitalist society,
					justice depends only on economics, not on whether crimes deserve
					to be punished. Humanity demands that Macheath suffer and pay for
					the crimes he committed against others. The play intentionally contrasts
					two principles that society holds true to force the audience to
					consider which one they would choose in a moment of truth.

The final scene of The Threepenny Opera is
					the most artfully constructed scene in the play. The stage instructions
					direct Macheath onstage to open the scene, and he remains stationary
					at its center while all the action circles around him and connects
					to him. Each major character comes to Macheath, and each of the
					major relationships reaches a resolution: Polly forgives him, Brown
					conclusively ends their friendship, and the thieves reach peace.
					These resolutions imply that Macheath is really going to die. From
					the central position, Macheath attempts to first save himself, to
					justify his life, and then to ask for forgiveness. His inability
					to escape and be free displays an avoidance of responsibility and
					a rise above vengeance, which only accentuates his confinement.
					With each effort, his options constrict further, until finally the
					only way for him to go is up the scaffold. Meanwhile, throughout
					the scene, the gallows are being built offstage, and the coronation
					informs the concerns and lives of all of the characters. The scene
					is compressed into a single space, even while giving a sense of
					a whole world continuing around it. Brecht also pursues compression
					in terms of time, as he sets the entire action of the scene within
					a single hour. The fact that the time moves more quickly than real
					time, skipping from 5:00 to 5:25 within
					the space of a few lines, gives an even stronger sense of compression,
					which finally serves its purpose when the jarring deus ex machina appears.

The appearance of the deus ex machina emphasizes a happy
					ending to the play. Deus ex machina, a Latin term
					meaning “god out of the machine,” refers to a dramatic device used
					in ancient Greek theater. Near the end of a play, a god would be
					lowered to the stage using a crane, or “machine,” and suddenly resolve
					all of the problems of the play. In modern theater, deus ex machina
					has come to refer to any improbable and illogical way of resolving
					a play’s conflicts happily. In The Threepenny Opera, the
					deus ex machina is especially jarring because of
					the sense of compression that Brecht had built up throughout the
					scene. All of a sudden, Macheath is liberated from certain death,
					and the characters are liberated from their roles. Polly, Brown,
					and Lucy are relieved because they no longer need to find a way
					to rescue Macheath. The Peachums also do not need to worry about
					Macheath interfering with their business. The freedom is a powerful
					sense of possibility. The scene also takes a surprising turn when
					the royal messenger is Brown, of all characters. After all his betrayals,
					Brown actually saves Macheath. Brown’s appearance with the order
					from the queen makes him an ironic hero in the end.

The decision to make Peachum explain the significance
					of the dues ex machina is extremely important. Throughout the play,
					Peachum has been the embodiment of the hollowness of moral values. He
					is a selfish hypocrite and a repulsive character. Here at the last possible
					moment, however, Peachum leaves his character behind and introduces
					a real moral lesson. This action allows Brecht to make use of one
					of the unique features of theatrical performance. Throughout the
					duration of The Threepenny Opera, the audience would
					have grasped how Peachum spouts hypocrisy and venom. No matter how
					much alienation Brecht employed, the audience would come to identify
					the actor with those characteristics. When he suddenly steps out
					and speaks honestly and morally, the audience cannot help but trust
					his words because they are so markedly in contrast to his earlier
					hypocrisy. By using Peachum, Brecht creates the conditions for an
					audience to hear a genuine plea for generosity and charity.

Brecht takes a radical approach when he asks the audience
					to accept the happy ending of the play. The very impossibility of
					the ending becomes the point, because in real life the poor are
					seldom spared for their crimes, and Macheath would be killed if
					the story were not portrayed in the theater. Brecht uses the surprising
					appearance of the deus ex machina to emphasize how rarely everyone
					can experience such relief in life. By doing so, he asks the audience
					to examine the pleasure they take in Macheath being spared. If the audience
					feels such relief when a fictional criminal is allowed to live, then
					Brecht questions why they should not seek the same reprieve for
					the real criminals in the streets outside the theater.

