Denise and Steffie’s grade school is evacuated because
					children and teachers are exhibiting mysterious symptoms like headaches,
					eye irritations, and the taste of metal in their mouths. One teacher
					starts rolling on the floor and speaking in foreign languages. The
					school closes for a week while inspectors do a sweep of the building.
					The inspectors’ suits are made of Mylex, a substance that confounds their
					detection equipment, rendering the results ambiguous and inconclusive.

While the girls are home from school, Jack, Babette, Wilder,
					and the girls take a trip to the supermarket. There, they run into
					Murray once again, and Jack notes that he’s seen Murray in the supermarket as
					many times as he’s seen him on campus. Jack listens to the din of the
					supermarket and thinks he can detect a strain of noise coming from
					within the human clamor: something dull and unlocatable, just beyond
					his perception.

Jack and Steffie walk down the aisles, and she tells Jack
					that Denise has been reading the Physician’s Desk Reference to
					find information about a drug Babette has been taking. Jack says
					he knows nothing about any drug.

In another part of the store, Murray helps Babette push
					her loaded cart and talks about the Tibetan philosophy of death.
					He tells Babette that he finds that the noises, colors, and psychic
					energy of the supermarket spiritually recharge him. Supermarkets
					contain untold amounts of hidden symbolism, he tells her, and reading
					the symbols is only a matter of learning how to peel back the layers
					of inscrutability. Babette nods, smiles, and shops her way through Murray’s
					lecture on dying. Wilder disappears briefly into someone else’s
					cart but is quickly recovered.

As they check out, Murray awkwardly invites Jack and Babette over
					for dinner, which they accept. In the parking lot, Jack and Babette
					hear a rumor that one of the Mylex-suited investigators died during
					the school inspection. 

As Jack observes the student body at the College-on-the-Hill,
					Jack feels that he can actually see the college’s high tuition reflected
					in the students’ bearing and the particular ways they sit, stand,
					and walk. To Jack, the students’ mannerisms signal a shared membership
					in some kind of secret fellowship, determined by their economic
					status.

At home, Denise chastises her mother for her gum-chewing
					habits. Denise lists the many potentially harmful effects of gum,
					such as its tendency to cause cancer in rats. Denise tells her mother
					that she can’t chew gum anymore and, in the course of their argument, brings
					up the memory lapses that Babette has been having recently.

Upstairs, Jack finds Heinrich studying moves for a chess
					game he plays via mail with a convicted killer named Tommy Roy Foster. Heinrich
					describes their correspondence and tells Jack that Foster committed
					the crime because he wanted to go down in history. Now, however,
					Foster realizes that shooting a few random people in a tiny town
					wasn’t enough to guarantee him fame, and if he could do it all again,
					he would just assassinate one famous person. Jack comments that
					he won’t go down in history, either, and Heinrich comments that
					Jack, at least, has Hitler, while Tommy Roy Foster has nothing. Jack
					and Heinrich discuss the fact that Heinrich’s mother wants him to
					visit her that summer at the ashram where she lives. Jack asks Heinrich
					if he wants to go, and Heinrich responds that he can’t tell. He
					might want to go, but then that desire might just be the result
					of a random misfiring neuron in his brain. 

The next morning, Jack goes to the ATM to check his balance. He
					finds comfort in the fact that his own accounting has been corroborated
					and validated by the bank’s computer system. 

Jack wakes up suddenly in the middle of the night, gripped
					by a powerful fear. The clock reads 3:51, and Jack wonders if the
					number might be significant. Perhaps, he wonders, some numbers are
					threatening, while others are life-affirming. 

The next morning, Jack wakes up to the smell of burnt
					toast. Jack says that Steffie often burns her toast because she
					loves the smell. When he goes downstairs, he finds Steffie and Babette
					in the kitchen. Jack remarks that he’ll be fifty-one the following
					week. Babette asks how being fifty-one feels, and Jack says that
					it’s no different from fifty. Except, Babette points out, one number
					is odd and the other is even.

Steffie asks about her mother, Dana Breedlove. Dana is
					a contract agent for the CIA who conducts covert drop-offs in Latin
					America. Later, when Steffie is distracted by a telemarketer’s phone
					call, Jack tells Babette that Dana liked to plot and was often getting
					him entangled in domestic and faculty battles. He remarks that she would
					speak English to him but that when she was on the phone she’d speak
					Spanish or Portuguese.

Jack and Babette go to Murray’s house for dinner that
					evening, and Murray cooks them a Cornish hen on his hot plate. Murray expounds
					on his theories about television. He describes how his students
					think television is worthless junk, but Murray insists that television
					is a primal and important force in American life. If you can open
					yourself up to television, Murray says, you can observe all kinds
					of incredible things concealed in the grid of buzzing dots and blips.

As Jack and Babette walk home after dinner, Babette brings
					up the memory lapses that Denise claims to have witnessed. Jack
					tries to reassure her that they are probably nothing. They discuss
					the pills Denise says she has seen, and Babette says she doesn’t
					think she is taking anything that could account for memory loss.

In these chapters, the novel begins to move into threatening
					territory. However, the accumulating dread still isn’t attached
					to a particular event or cause. Instead, this dread, continuously
					hovering in the distance, seems to linger around Jack. Menace seems
					to lurk around every corner, often in seemingly innocuous places.
					Gum chewing, according to Denise, can have fatal consequences, and
					the supermarket, according to Murray, resembles the Tibetan holding place
					for the dead. The mysterious ailment that afflicts the girls’ school
					represents the novel’s first real brush with danger. However, the
					threat passes almost as soon as it appears, dissolving away with nearly
					no consequences—except for the anonymous inspector, rumored dead. 

Throughout White Noise, ominous situations
					arise, only to be quickly deflated. But, as is the case with the
					dead, Mylex-suited inspector, discomfort and uneasiness never truly
					dissipate. This tendency will be most clearly demonstrated in the
					airborne toxic event of Chapter 21, in which Jack finds himself
					exposed to a chemical that will surely prove lethal, but probably
					not for several decades, at which point Jack will already be well
					into old age. This evaluation confirms Jack’s suspicions that he
					has been marked for death, yet it keeps the actual realization of
					Jack’s death at bay. Jack lives under the shadow of an unnamed threat
					yet can never be truly sure of the nature of that threat.

Heinrich’s relationship with Tommy Roy Foster represents another
					threatening element in these chapters, confirming Jack’s earlier
					suspicions that Heinrich “brings a danger to him.” Heinrich’s relationship
					to Tommy Roy Foster is typical of the relationship Jack’s family
					has to danger, in that Foster remain distant and separate from Heinrich,
					safe behind bars and only communicating through letters. Like the
					unnamed menace that seems to hover around Jack, Foster makes his
					presence felt without actually being present, tangible, or visible.
					While he discusses Foster with Jack, Heinrich is the first to note
					the way Jack’s interest in Hitler is more than simply academic.
					Heinrich remarks that Tommy Roy Foster won’t “go down in history,”
					since he only killed some anonymous civilians. Jack, however, “has
					Hitler,” while Foster has nothing. Just as Foster would capitalize
					on a famous victim’s personal glory, Jack capitalizes on Hitler’s
					fame to bolster his own identity. The fact that Heinrich equates
					his father with a convicted mass-murderer foreshadows the events
					of the final chapter, when Jack attempts murder. In a more general
					way, it also suggests the voracious way Jack consumes Hitler’s mythos
					in order to strengthen himself.

Finally, these chapters develop the theme of codes and
					code-breaking more fully. Throughout the novel, characters analyze texts,
					symbols, and images to divine deeper meanings. Denise pores over
					the Physician’s Desk Reference in an attempt to
					diagnose her mother’s illness. Murray is an extreme case of this
					tendency, as he claims to find evidence of codes everywhere—from
					television transmissions to the colors and shapes of food packaging
					in the supermarket. To Murray, the entire modern world pulses with
					hidden messages and secret languages, and the act of decoding is
					a source of endless fascination and wonder to him. Jack also thinks
					he sees codes working all around him, but he isn’t sure whether
					they are benign or malicious. He notes, for example, that he wakes
					up at exactly 3:51 and frantically tries to grasp the meaning of
					this mysterious number. He wonders if he should find significance
					in the fact that 3:51 ends in an odd digit or in the fact that he
					will be fifty-one on his next birthday. Jack would like to believe
					that the world operates in such systematic, precise ways, because
					such regularity would lend his life shape and meaning. However,
					as the novel progresses, whether the world is, in fact, methodical
					becomes increasingly less clear.

