The war drags on. Port blockades make food, clothing,
					and other necessities increasingly difficult to obtain. Rhett is
					the most famous Confederate blockade-runner, sneaking boats through
					the Yankee blockade in order to sell cotton and other Southern products
					in exchange for necessities. He becomes the most popular man in
					town despite his reputation for disregarding social customs. He
					calls on Scarlett frequently, and she quickly abandons any pretense
					of mourning Charles’s death. She enjoys the informality occasioned
					by the war and lives an active social life. After months of polite
					behavior, Rhett starts publicly expressing his contempt for Confederate idealism
					and declares that he works for personal gain, not for the Southern
					cause. One night at a party, Rhett scandalizes his audience by exclaiming
					that the war is about money, not pride, rights, or glory. In the
					carriage ride home, Melanie defends Rhett, revealing that in his
					letters Ashley has expressed beliefs similar to Rhett’s. The revelation
					that her shining idol and a scoundrel have the same opinions about
					the war confuses Scarlett.

The entire city, with the exception of the Hamilton household,
					vilifies Rhett. He continues to call on Scarlett, however, and gives
					her a fancy hat from Paris so she will stop wearing the required
					black mourning veil. One day Melanie tells Scarlett that a prostitute named
					Belle Watling gave her a considerable sum of money for the hospital.
					Belle wrapped the money in a handkerchief, which Melanie now holds,
					and Scarlett sees that it bears Rhett’s initials. Shocked that Rhett
					would consort with a prostitute, Scarlett flings the handkerchief
					into the fire.

The people remain optimistic despite food shortages, death,
					illness, and poverty. The Confederacy has won important battles,
					and rumors begin to circulate that the war will be settled at an
					impending battle at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania. As the battle begins,
					news of widespread casualties slowly trickles back to Atlanta. A
					large crowd of women gathers before the newspaper office to wait
					for casualty lists. Melanie, Scarlett, and Pittypat learn that Ashley
					has survived, but nearly every family in Atlanta has lost a relative
					in the fighting. Stuart and Brent Tarleton have died.

The Confederacy loses the battle at Gettysburg. At Christmastime, Ashley
					comes home on a brief leave of absence. Scarlett loves seeing him,
					but wishes she could speak to him alone. Just before he leaves, she
					gets a moment with him. Ashley asks Scarlett to look after Melanie
					if he is killed. Scarlett quickly agrees and then kisses him passionately.
					Ashley kisses her back but quickly breaks away as Scarlett proclaims
					her love, and he hurries to the train station looking agonized.

It is early in 1864.
					The Confederate army has lost ground and Atlanta suffers from cold
					and hunger. Atlanta openly reviles Rhett as a food speculator and
					a profiteer. Scarlett receives two devastating pieces of news: Ashley
					has been captured, and Melanie is pregnant. Rhett has learned of
					Ashley’s imprisonment and tells Scarlett that Ashley could have
					won his freedom by betraying the Confederacy. Scarlett asks why
					Ashley would have refused such an opportunity, and Rhett, who claims
					he himself would have accepted, replies contemptuously that Ashley
					is too much of a gentleman.

Rhett, as a symbol of the New South, forces the people
					around him to listen to the harsh truths about the war, pointing
					out the economic problems that Southern leaders refuse to acknowledge. Although
					he is abrasive and contemptuous, Rhett cuts through the rosy rhetoric
					of leaders like Dr. Meade and exposes the hypocrisies and weaknesses
					obscured by the South’s rampant patriotism. Rhett insists on voicing
					truths that the South would rather not face. He asserts that the
					war is more about money than people will admit and that those who
					make grand speeches about states’ rights care for nothing but their
					own wealth and privilege. Ashley also recognizes the truths that
					Rhett voices, but, as Scarlett realizes, Ashley nevertheless resigns
					himself to fighting for a lost cause. Ashley reinforces his position
					as symbol of the Old South, fighting desperately for a life that
					has already been lost to the New South that Rhett Butler represents.

	Until the Civil War, the Southern economy depended largely
					on its cotton production, which relied on slave labor for the intensive work.
					The slave-driven economy brought great wealth to the plantation
					owners and left the South relatively untouched by the industrial
					revolution that swept the North. The South became dependent on the
					North and on England to buy its crops and to supply manufactured
					goods. As Rhett explains to the men at Twelve Oaks, the South has
					raw resources but lacks means of production. When the North blocks
					off Southern ports, the South finds its markets cut off. It can
					neither export its crops for income nor import goods for consumption.
					Blockade-runners like Rhett become invaluable as a way of getting
					and selling goods. As the blockade tightens, the entire South suffers
					from a shortage of goods and skyrocketing prices.

	Those people who control resources—government contractors and
					blockade-runners like Rhett—soon win the public’s ire by profiting
					from the scarcity of goods. The people who control the goods can
					control the prices. Because goods are so scarce, demand rises, and
					people like Rhett can push prices to astronomical heights, sometimes
					even holding onto goods instead of selling them right away so that
					prices go up still more. Southerners initially bless the blockade-runners
					for procuring goods, but as they begin to understand the reality
					of price-fixing, their praise turns to hatred. The profiteering
					of the blockade-runners marks the beginning of the South’s helplessness,
					which continues with the postwar descent of the carpetbaggers, Northerners
					who go down South to profit under Reconstruction-era policies.

	Some critics fault Mitchell’s novel for focusing entirely
					on the upper classes, glorifying Southern culture and glossing over
					its faults. Mitchell paints a picture of a South victimized by greed
					and selfishness. For example, she portrays the plantation owners
					as helpless in the face of the profiteer’s opportunism. She condemns hypocritical
					government contractors and the Southerners who stay in the local
					militia instead of going into battle farther north. Other inhabitants
					of the South seem to exist in a harmless, happy world. Mitchell
					suggests that their only sin is naiveté. However, portraying wealthy
					Southerners as victims of profiteering ignores the history of how
					the plantation owners accumulated the wealth of which they soon
					found themselves stripped. Gerald, a self-made man, gets his plantation
					through a poker game, but his success, like the success of every
					plantation owner in the South, depends upon the exploitation of
					slaves and the crowding out of poor whites like the Slatterys. Neither
					the plantation owners nor Mitchell acknowledge the fact that most
					rich Southerners succeed by oppressing people. Consistent with the
					sentiments of her time and class, Mitchell acknowledges only the
					wrongs committed against the upper class.

