At Dan’s birthday, Laura becomes irritated when he spits
					on the cake while blowing out the candles. She feels a spasm of
					rage and feels trapped in her role as a domestic. The anger passes
					and she thinks about how Dan is steady and reliable. She asks Richie
					if he made a wish and if he wants to help cut the cake. Laura thinks
					of how the room is full of happiness and goodness, but the moment will
					pass and eventually disappear from memory. 

After dinner, Virginia tries to read but keeps thinking
					about the fact that Leonard has agreed to move back to London. She
					thinks of the kiss she gave Vanessa and how it was full of the complexity
					and mystery that she associates with London. She realizes that Clarissa
					Dalloway must have loved a woman and have kissed her once and carried
					the memory of the kiss her whole life. Leonard interrupts Virginia’s
					thoughts to tell her to go to bed by eleven. As she stands in the
					living room watching the light play off the tabletop, she has a revelation
					about Clarissa’s suicide. She decides that someone other than Clarissa
					will commit suicide, someone who is sick in the mind and sees the
					whole world as meaningful.

Laura stands in the bathroom and brushes her teeth. She
					knows that Dan will want to have sex with her when she gets into
					bed and realizes that she won’t be able to have any time to read.
					A shadow crosses behind her in the mirror and she opens the medicine
					cabinet. She looks at a full bottle of sleeping pills and thinks
					about how easy it would be to use them to commit suicide.

Laura enters the bedroom and stands by the side of the
					bed while Dan asks her to get in. Her mind seems to detach from
					her body, and she feels as though she is floating above the scene.
					She feels as if she is reading the scene in the way a person would
					read a book. Even though she knows so much about the situation,
					she does not feel as if she is participates in it. 

Laura Brown, now an old woman, comes into Clarissa’s apartment with
					Clarissa and Sally. Julia has put away all of the food purchased for
					the party, but the flowers are still there. Julia has fallen asleep
					on the couch, and they wake her up. Julia tells them that a few
					guests didn’t receive the message and showed up to the party. One
					of the guests was Louis, who broke down when he received the news
					that Richard had killed himself. Julia stayed and talked with him
					until he calmed down and left. Julia and Sally go to the kitchen
					to get food for Laura, while Laura and Clarissa sit in the living
					room.

Laura and Clarissa sit in awkward silence, and Clarissa
					asks her if she would like to go to bed. Laura says that she’ll
					be ready for bed in a little while. In Richard’s poems, Laura is
					portrayed as a failed suicide and a mother who walks out on her
					family. Clarissa considers this portrayal and how strange it is
					that Laura has outlived her whole family. 

Clarissa goes to the kitchen to see if Julia has made
					Laura’s tea. In the kitchen, all of the food for the party sits
					beautifully presented. Sally says that they should all eat and go
					to bed, and Clarissa suddenly realizes that Richard is really dead.
					She wonders how life can have meaning when everybody inevitably
					dies. Clarissa decides that the meaning can be found in those hours
					when you feel satisfied—and you feel as though all has been delivered.

Laura becomes irrationally angry with Dan for spoiling
					the perfection of her cake. Her feelings seem disproportionate to
					the slight that he has committed by spitting on the cake while blowing
					out the candles. The anger emerges from her feeling that the cake
					is a work of art, a small yet nonetheless important creative outlet
					for her frustrated energies. Her feelings pass when she thinks for
					a moment about Dan’s good intentions and the feelings of happiness
					in the room. However, her feelings about the goodness in the room
					indicate that she has an outsider’s view: she has stepped out of
					her perspective about her life and behaves as an outside observer, commenting
					on rather than fully participating in the scene. These feelings
					of detachment from her family life indicate that she may be ready
					to leave it.

Virginia decides to separate herself completely from her
					character Clarissa Dalloway. Clarissa will be a happy, life-affirming
					character—not the doomed woman that Virginia initially imagined. Instead,
					Virginia will create a character that provides contrast to Clarissa.
					In Mrs. Dalloway, that character is Septimus Smith,
					a tormented soldier who commits suicide soon after returning to
					London from the war. Virginia has decided to separate her Clarissa
					side from her dark, less pragmatic alter ego. The separation of
					the two aspects of her character into the wide-eyed woman and the
					tormented madman shows how Virginia perceives her nature as split
					or dual: Her internal conflicts throughout the day reveal both sides,
					and it is perhaps the inability to reconcile the two that drive
					her to commit suicide.

Laura draws an explicit comparison between the way she
					feels about life and the way she feels about the books that she
					reads. The pieces come together, in that she is detached from her
					life and feels like a loner. She starts to think that perhaps her
					attempts at feeling satisfied with her family are not enough. Laura’s
					realization comes as she prepares for bed, an important moment that
					allows her to evaluate a single day as if it were representative
					of her whole life. In the same way that Virginia Woolf wants to
					tell the story of a woman’s life in a single day, Laura looks back
					at her day as representative of her attitudes and feelings about
					her life. She feels frustrated by her life and detaches from her
					day-to-day existence as a coping mechanism. 

In the last chapter, Clarissa forgives Laura for what
					she has done to Richard, and she also forgives herself for living
					the life she has chosen. Although we know that Laura is Richard’s
					mother, the meeting between the two characters in the last chapter
					feels jarring. It is strange to see Laura in the end, without knowing
					all that has happened in the intervening years. The only clues come
					from Clarissa’s evaluation of Laura. She has never been the type
					to judge others too harshly, as evidenced in her interactions with
					Walter. Even when she feels attacked, as by Mary Krull, she keeps
					her thoughts to herself and tries to understand the other person.
					She doesn’t judge Laura either, even though Richard portrayed Laura
					as a monster sometimes. Now Laura is just an old woman, and Clarissa
					understands that Laura has had a complicated life and has reasons
					behind all of her decisions. Clarissa also forgives herself, and
					she comes to the realization that life must be taken as it comes
					and that individual hours can provide moments of joy and profound
					pleasure. 

