Sirius Black and James Potter attended Hogwarts together,
				and Sirius is Harry’s godfather. Sirius is an Animagus, which means
				he can transform himself into a black, shaggy dog named Padfoot
				at will. Years ago, Sirius was wrongly imprisoned at Azkaban for
				the murder of thirteen people. Following his escape, he has been
				forced to live in absolute secrecy. To keep Sirius safe, Dumbledore
				demands that Sirius not leave his parents’ home at Twelve Grimmauld
				Place, lest the Ministry of Magic catch him and return him to Azkaban.
				In this sense, Harry and Sirius lead parallel lives, since Dumbledore orders
				Harry to spend his summers with the Dursleys. In both cases, Dumbledore
				is simply attempting to ensure his friends’ safety, but both Harry
				and Sirius resent the lack of freedom that goes along with such
				isolation, likening it to imprisonment. Sirius grew up at Twelve
				Grimmauld Place but has long since dismissed the rest of the Black
				family, who chose to follow Voldemort. Being trapped in that house
				simply reminds Sirius of his alienation, just as Harry’s time at Privet
				Drive reminds him of his own lack of real family.

Although Mr. and Mrs. Weasley often act as Harry’s surrogate parents,
				Sirius is the closest Harry has to family, and Harry clearly treasures
				their relationship. Whenever Harry is in trouble or confused, he
				turns to Sirius for advice. Sirius, in turn, is protective of Harry,
				doing his best to assure his godson’s safety and well-being. As
				other members of the Order of the Phoenix have observed, Sirius occasionally
				confuses Harry with his father, James Potter, and Sirius’s relationship
				with Harry seems to be deepened by his mourning for James. Often,
				when Harry expresses reservations about one of Sirius’s suggestions,
				Sirius reprimands him for not being more like James, who thrived
				on risk-taking. In a way, Harry can get to know his own father through
				Sirius, and, surprisingly, the images he stumbles across in Book
				V are not the unequivocally positive ones he has always carried
				with him. 

