The Wart and Kay walk toward the Forest Sauvage alongside
					the strip of barley in Sir Ector’s fields. Eventually, they encounter
					a seven-foot-tall giant named Little John. Little John leads them
					to the camp of a man he calls Robin Wood, known to the villagers
					as Robin Hood. At the camp they meet Robin and his love, Maid Marian.
					Robin tells them that one of his men, Friar Tuck, has been kidnapped
					by Morgan le Fay, a woman of uncertain origin who is believed to
					be the queen of fairies. Le Fay has also captured one of Sir Ector’s
					servants, Dog Boy, and a local idiot named Wat. The Wart and Kay
					agree to help rescue the three men.

Robin tells the Wart and Kay that although his men will
					help them get to Morgan le Fay’s castle, only innocent children
					may enter, so the Wart and Kay will have to go on alone. Robin gives
					the boys a small knife, which he explains will protect them because
					fairies are afraid of iron. Robin warns them not to eat anything
					while they are in the castle, since they will be trapped there forever
					if they do so. As he gives them his instructions, his men drift
					in silently for their meal.

That night, the company regroups near the castle,
					and Marian, Kay, and the Wart successfully sneak past a fierce griffin,
					a creature with the head of a falcon, the body of a lion, and the
					tail of a snake. The fairies, hoping to lure in children, have made
					their castle out of butter, cheese, and meat, but the Wart and Kay
					find it nauseating. Inside the castle, the Wart and Kay find Morgan
					le Fay resting on a bed of lard, and Dog Boy, Friar Tuck, and Wat
					tied to pillars of pork. The boys rescue the prisoners by threatening
					Morgan le Fay with their knives.

Although the castle disappears when Morgan le Fay is defeated,
					the griffin remains and attacks Kay and the Wart as they escape.
					Robin’s men try unsuccessfully to fight the griffin off with their
					bows. As the griffin leaps toward the Wart, Kay shoots an arrow
					into its eye, and it dies. The griffin falls on the Wart, breaking
					his collarbone. Robin’s men present Kay with the griffin’s
					head. As his reward for the adventure, the Wart asks only to be
					able to bring Wat back to Merlyn to see if the magician can cure
					Wat, who is mad. Back at Sir Ector’s castle, the boys are congratulated
					for their adventure, and Kay is very proud.

The Wart becomes bored with recuperating from a broken
					collarbone and asks Merlyn to change him into an ant in one of the
					colonies Merlyn keeps in a glass tank. Merlyn agrees and tells the
					Wart to place a reed between the two nests. He then changes the
					Wart into an ant, and the Wart finds himself at the outskirts of
					one of the two nests. A sign above the entrance to the colony reads, EVERYTHING
						NOT FORBIDDEN IS COMPULSORY. In his head, the Wart can
					hear repetitive broadcasts that alternate between giving orders
					and directions and playing repetitive, soothing gibberish. The Wart
					comes across an ant who is busy arranging the corpses of two dead
					ants. Because the Wart is doing nothing, the ant thinks he is insane
					and reports him to the central command. Sarcastically, the Wart
					says he has merely hit his head and forgotten his identity, and the
					ant finds work for him. As the Wart works, he hears more and more
					broadcasts that prepare the nest for war with illogical arguments
					and religious sermons that advocate violence. Just as the two ant
					colonies are about to go to war, Merlyn returns the Wart to human
					form.

“The Sword in the Stone” is often considered to be more
					directed toward children than the other three books of The
						Once and Future King, and Kay’s quest supports this claim.
					Kay’s and the Wart’s adventures in the Forest Sauvage are comical,
					enjoyable, and filled with the typical traits of a fairy tale or
					a children’s story: castles, griffins, fairies, and, of course,
					the character of Robin Hood. White’s principle inspiration for The
						Once and Future King was Sir Thomas Malory’s Morte d’Arthur,
					a fifteenth-century prose rendition of the Arthurian legend that
					has become one of its most definitive interpretations. In his novel,
					however, White drastically departs from the characters of Malory’s
					creation. The episode feels like it is a lighthearted jaunt
					outside of the novel’s regular world that tries to delight a younger
					audience by combining famous characters like Robin Hood with fairy-tale
					elements like Morgan le Fay and the griffin.

As Kay develops as a character, he remains overly proud
					and arrogant, but also becomes more likable. We feel more sympathy
					for the Wart, but once Kay is given his chance to shine, he shows
					some admirable traits. For example, Kay proves to be very brave,
					and he has an unerring skill at archery that allows him to shoot
					the griffin and save his companions. Kay is bound to emerge as the
					quest’s hero, since it is his adventure, but he behaves with courage
					and good grace nonetheless. The Wart is not a hero in this episode
					in the same sense as Kay, since he does not win fights or kill beasts.
					The Wart does, however, have an unusually strong sense of kindness
					and compassion, and he is consistently selfless. After he and Kay
					rescue Robin Hood’s friends from the fairy, the Wart seeks only
					to have Wat cured. He is not interested in the superficial
					trappings of glory; rather, he cares about his fellow human beings
					and wants what is in their best interests.

The Wart’s trip to the ant colony makes a powerful statement
					on how societies run the risk of becoming overly rigid and uniform. The
					ant society is clearly communal, but not because each member chooses
					to work for the common good. Rather, each ant blindly does whatever
					task it has been assigned. Chillingly, the ants depend on this conformity,
					and while the Wart is horrified by this cold and faceless society,
					the other ants find the monotony comforting. Whereas the king pike
					of the moat demonstrates to the Wart the cruelty of individual tyranny,
					the ants are an example of the tyranny of the masses, under which
					freedom is willfully surrendered. This is a society so practical
					that, as the sign on the tunnels that lead to the gates says, everything
						not forbidden is compulsory. The emphasis on labor and
					the contradictory messages that are continuously broadcast have
					a contemporary ring. The ant society seems to represent communist
					societies, which often revolved around the idea that each member
					would labor for the common good. This episode aims not only to teach
					the Wart how dangerous these supposed utopias can be, but also to
					alert us to the fallacies of socialist society.

