When Dinah returns home to her family’s camp, she has
					reached the peak of her adolescence. After living among mainly women
					for three months, she is shocked by the crudeness of her father
					and brothers when she returns to her camp. The noise and stench
					of the camp overwhelm her. Even her mother Leah has changed, acting
					bossy and demanding, so Dinah begins sleeping in Rachel’s tent.
					Slowly, she grows accustomed to her family’s way of life again,
					though she starts to feel a longing within her that she cannot name.
					She takes great interest in the mating dogs and listens to her brother
					Judah and his wife Shua as they make love at night. Jacob and his
					sons begin to talk of moving elsewhere in order to find more land.
					Simon and Levi go to Shechem to speak with its king, Hamor, who
					offers them a large piece of land. Jacob’s family dismantles the
					camp, and they move again to a valley with a large mountain alongside
					it. Here, three more of the brothers take wives and the herds multiply. 

Soon after they reach their new home, Dinah reaches womanhood.
					She is surprised and for a moment considers keeping it to herself
					and remaining a girl in the eyes of her family. After a moment of reticence,
					she tells her mothers, and they smother her with hugs and kisses.
					Her ceremony begins that night at dusk. Dinah drinks sweet wine
					and is painted with henna on her feet and palms. Her mothers dress
					her in a rough homespun gown, feed her sweets, and massage her neck
					and back while offering her more and more wine. Rachel brings out
					the teraphim, and all fall silent. Dinah chooses the special frog
					goddess, and they take her outside to lie in a wheat patch in the garden.
					She lies naked facedown in the soil. Her mothers oil the teraphim
					and insert it into Dinah to “open her womb” by breaking her hymen
					so that her blood returns to the earth and to the goddess Innana.
					Though she cries out, the procedure does not really hurt. The wine
					causes Dinah to fall into a sleep, in which she dreams of Taweret,
					an Egyptian goddess who lives in the river. 

Simon and Levi’s wives, who are Canaanite, witness the
					private ritual. As it is not their custom, they are shocked by the
					family’s ritual of womanhood and run to tell their husbands, who
					have remained ignorant of these rituals. The men are disgusted,
					and Jacob orders the women to return the teraphim to him. He shatters and
					buries most of the teraphim. Jacob now frowns upon the red tent
					and the practices that occur within it, since he does not understand
					the women’s rituals, but he allows them to continue. With every
					new moon, Dinah now joins her mothers and the other women in the
					tent as a mature woman. Leah is pleased to have her daughter sit
					beside her in the straw. Inna and Rachel keep busy delivering babies
					to women in the vicinity of the camp. Dinah begins to attend the
					births occasionally and begins to see midwifery as her calling,
					so she becomes Rachel’s apprentice.

Dinah demonstrates a new level of intellectual and emotional
					maturity when she gets her period. Upon realizing that she has it,
					she debates for a moment whether to tell her mother. After her initial childlike
					hesitance, she acknowledges that no one can stop or change the future,
					so all one can do is accept it. Having lived under the pampering
					care of so many women, there has been little impetus for Dinah to
					develop independence or emotional maturity. She has lived a comfortable
					existence as the baby girl for her entire life. Dinah’s recent troubles
					with Rebecca at Mamre and her growing insight into the role of women
					in the family and the community have helped her to develop a more
					mature outlook. She understands the honor of participating in the
					monthly ritual in the tent and is ready to take her place among
					her mothers as an equal. Dinah has also started to show interest
					in the marital relations in the camp, revealing her growing curiosity
					about sexuality and the relationships between men and women. For
					the first time in her life, Dinah finds herself pulling away from
					her mothers and moving toward her own desires. 

The graphic scene of Dinah’s initiation ceremony into
					womanhood foreshadows the coming violence in the novel. Dinah undergoes
					the same menstruation ritual as all the women before her, including
					her mothes, and is treated as a queen for the day. At first, Dinah’s
					ritual is described much like Rachel’s, but then Diamant adds a
					more graphic scene in which her mothers physically break Dinah’s
					hymen with the sacred teraphim. Dinah cries out as her blood spills
					into the earth. Diamant includes this added description to demonstrate
					the gravity and significance of the ritual and the changes in Dinah’s
					perspective, as well as to foreshadow the bloody pain that will
					soon befall Dinah. Until this point in the novel, nothing unpleasant
					has happened personally to Dinah, only to other characters. This
					ritual is her first experience of personal pain, however small,
					and it anticipates the pain that her union with Shalem will cause
					her. 

Jacob starts to understand the discrepancy between his
					religion and his wives’ practices, which leads him to destroy the
					teraphim to show that he disapproves of the ceremonies of the red
					tent. Though the four sisters have always fulfilled their obligations
					to Jacob and his god, they have continued to worship their multitude
					of goddesses and engage in pagan rituals in the privacy of the red
					tent. Jacob behaves rationally, but because he preaches the word
					of the One God, he cannot permit his wives to act as polytheists.
					He is entirely devoted to his god and credits his health, fertility,
					and power to the blessings of his god. Diamant modifies the standard depiction
					of Jacob’s wives as the sacrosanct matriarchs of all monotheistic
					religions.

