Yolanda remembers the close ties between her sisters and
					her cousins when they lived in the family compound of adjoining
					houses in the Dominican Republic. Each sister had a particular cousin
					who was close in age and a best friend. Yolanda's buddy was her
					boy cousin Mundin, even though their friendship was discouraged
					by her aunts. Her family members worried that Yolanda would end
					up a tomboy.

Her grandfather had a political appointment for the United Nations,
					and as a result had to deal with close scrutiny and annoying searches
					by the dictatorship and the secret police. Yolanda's only experience
					with violence was what she saw in American movies. Her grandmother
					needed special treatments in the U.S. for unspecified medical issues,
					and her grandfather humored her willfulness. They often traveled
					to New York City, and they would always bring toys for the children
					when they returned from a trip to the U.S.

Yolanda was discouraged from being a tomboy or playing
					cowboy with her male cousins, but she once received a cowgirl outfit with
					a skirt that matched Mundin's cowboy outfit. Once their Aunt Mimi
					brought them a toy called The Human Body, a plastic doll with removable
					body parts, and pink modeling clay. She also brought a book about
					Scheherezade's enchanting story-telling abilities. Yolanda enjoyed
					reading the book until her cousin Mundin teased her with the clay.
					He made a long boa constrictor out of the clay and tempted her to
					follow him. He offered to trade the clay to Yolanda if she would
					show him that she was a girl. He wanted her to prove it in a coal
					shed at the back of the family compound. The family lived next door
					to the dictator's daughter and her family, and the coal shed was
					strictly off limits to the children.

Sofia followed Yolanda and Mundin into the shed and threatened
					to tell on them. Yolanda told her she could stay if she promised to
					keep her mouth shut. Each girl pulled off her clothes and panties, and
					Mundin was disappointed to learn that they just look like dolls. He
					then divided the clay equally between the two sisters. Yolanda wanted
					all of it and felt jealous that her sister got an equal share of the
					deal. She then demanded that Mundin give her the Human Body doll
					in exchange for not telling on him. Mundin agreed and ran to get
					the doll.

Mundin's mother and the gardener then found the two sisters lurking
					around in the dirty shed. When questioned, Yolanda lied and claimed
					they were hiding from the secret police. Mundin returned but did
					not confirm her story. Mundin's mother did not know whether to believe
					the children or not, but made them all return to the house. When
					all the pieces of the Human Body were finally collected, they had
					been chewed by the dog or crushed, and they did not all fit back
					into the doll the way they should have.

Yolanda's childhood experiences contributed to her perceptions
					of gender norms and appropriate modes of behavior for girls and women
					in the Dominican Republic. The fact that her cowboy outfit included
					a skirt and her cousin's had more versatile pants emphasizes the
					difference between them. He would be allowed to play in more physical
					and dangerous ways than she would, since she was forbidden from
					acting like a tomboy. Yet, Yolanda saw it as a triumph that the
					outfits were as similar as they could be, given the required differences.
					The children got into trouble when overwhelmed by their greed for
					extra toys and their curiosity to understand the gender differences
					that they were coerced into recognizing.

Yolanda's enjoyment of A Thousand and One Arabian
						Nights foreshadows her later development as a writer and
					storyteller. The clay form that Mundin uses to tempt Yolanda into
					sin and trouble in the coal shed recalls Eve's fall from grace due
					to the serpent's temptation in Genesis. The story
					of Adam and Eve is a fundamental parable of gender difference that
					underlies Catholic attitudes toward sex and gender.

The Human Body doll represents a clinical and academic
					understanding of the body, something the children generally were
					not permitted to access when it related to sexuality. Within Dominican culture
					the female children would not have access to sex education the way
					they might in the American educational system. Yolanda's desire
					to get the doll from her male cousin could represent a her wish to
					even out the sexual double standard as it related to sex education and
					awareness. Certainly Mundin has the upper hand when convincing the
					girls to show him their genitals, since he does not have to make
					a similar sacrifice for them. Mundin's comment that the girls only
					looked like dolls could indicate a future penchant for objectifying
					women's bodies.

The destruction of the Human Body doll represents the
					fact that once innocence is tainted by the brutal realities of life,
					all the pieces that once added up to a coherent whole will not fit
					together anymore. This process could foreshadow Yolanda's future
					disillusionment with love, sex, and marriage.

