Lucy, the novel’s protagonist and narrator, seeks independence from the
				colonial and maternal forces that shaped her youth, but her journey to North
				America to serve as an au pair for a wealthy family only
				highlights many of the influences that have hindered her and reveals the
				ambivalence behind her apparent drive for freedom. For all her bitter remarks
				about her mother and her native land, she frequently experiences intense
				homesickness and longing for her mother’s love. Though she no longer lives under
				British rule, she resents the upper-class privileges of her American employers.
				She replicates her difficult relationship with her mother in her dealings with
				Mariah and, to a lesser extent, Peggy. As she did at home, she embarks on sexual
				relationships with men who please her physically but leave her emotionally
				detached. Lucy realizes early on that her hopes of creating a glorious new life
				for herself bear little resemblance to reality, and with each new
				disappointment, Lucy develops a fatalism that at once strengthens her and makes
				her vulnerable. Though Lucy’s harsh view of the world prepares her for the
				hardships of living on her own terms, it also, at times, drives her to despair.

Much of Lucy’s quest for freedom results in isolation. She spends her
				first weeks as an immigrant without much human connection, and though she grows
				close to Mariah, Miriam, and Peggy, her most important relationships eventually
				unravel, and she finds herself, for the first time, truly living on her own. She
				has even further separated herself from her mother, and, by implication, her
				entire homeland, by giving a false report of her whereabouts. While Lucy, to
				some degree, has achieved her independence, it doesn’t bring her the joy she
				imagines. On the contrary, the novel’s conclusion finds her tearfully yearning
				for the capacity to love. Lucy’s alienation is typical of the immigrant
				experience, but only some of her loneliness clearly relates to her new
				surroundings. Her estrangement goes back to her place of birth and follows her
				beyond her adjustment to America. For Lucy, isolation transcends immigration to
				form an essential part of her existence, regardless of location or
				circumstance.

