In March, David Malter returns from the hospital and Reuven
					is elated to have his father home. At school, Rav Gershenson now
					calls on him regularly, and Reuven is always ready with expert answers. Danny
					continues to ignore Reuven, and Reuven finally comes to accept Danny’s
					silence.

As fighting in Palestine increases, Reuven and his Zionist
					classmates intensify their efforts, even volunteering to load supply
					trucks with military gear to be shipped overseas. In April, David
					Malter wistfully tells Reuven that he had been selected to be a
					delegate at the Zionist General Council in Palestine the coming
					summer. However, following his heart attack, he no longer will be
					able to attend. In May, the State of Israel is born, and Reuven
					and his father weep with joy. The Arabs immediately attack the young
					nation, and as they invade, David Malter again becomes distracted
					and unsettled. In June, the students at Hirsch learn that a recent
					Hirsch graduate was killed during the fighting. The college holds
					a memorial assembly, and all anti-Zionist activity at Hirsch immediately
					ceases. 

Reuven receives straight A’s for his sophomore year, passes
					a quiet July in sweltering New York, and a calm August with his father
					at their cottage. In September, he begins his third year at college
					and chooses philosophy as his major. David Malter gradually resumes
					his teaching, and then, a few months later, his Zionist activities.
					That spring, after Israel has secured the upper hand, Reb Saunders’s
					anti-Zionist activities appear to end. Soon after, Danny approaches
					Reuven in the lunchroom, and, with a smile on his face, asks for
					Reuven’s help with math.

After not speaking for more than two years, Reuven and
					Danny talk about the silence that existed between them. Reuven asks
					Danny how he can possibly bear the silence between him and his father,
					and Danny replies that he has learned to live with it. Reuven also expresses
					his dislike for Reb Saunders and remarks that Danny has lost weight.
					Danny says that his eyes have been bothering him. That night, Reuven
					discusses Reb Saunders’s imposed silence with his father. David
					Malter cryptically remarks, “What a price to pay for a soul,” but
					refuses to explain any further.

	Danny and Reuven resume their regular weekday meetings,
					and also begin having dazzling disputes in class that please Rav
					Gershenson. Outside of class, Danny reveals that he resigned himself
					to the experimental methods of psychology and has begun to see the shortcomings
					in Freud’s work. Nevertheless, he still does not want to become
					an experimental psychologist. Instead, he has decided to go into
					clinical psychology, which combines experimental hypotheses with
					therapeutic work with human patients. Also, Danny has applied to
					doctoral programs in psychology. He informs Reuven that he is waiting
					until the day of his smicha—his Rabbinic ordination—to break the
					news to his father.

	That June, Reuven attends Danny’s sister’s
					wedding and sees Reb Saunders for the first time in more than two
					years. Since Reuven last saw him, Danny’s father appears to have
					aged a great deal. Due to the crowd of people at the wedding, Reuven
					is unable to speak to Reb Saunders, but he does not mind the lack
					of communication with the rabbi, whom he still dislikes intensely. Later
					that summer, in July, Reuven visits Danny’s house and goes up to
					Reb Saunders’s study. Danny’s father says he is very happy to see
					Reuven and asks why he has not been coming over on Saturday afternoons
					to study Talmud. Reuven answers that he has been studying with his
					own father, but Reb Saunders asks him if he could come over one
					Saturday anyway. Though Reuven says he will try, he has no intention
					of honoring Reb Saunders’s request. After Reb Saunders says nothing
					about Zionism or about the silence he imposed between Danny and
					Reuven, Reuven finds he likes the old man even less than before.

Chapter 15 is brief and serves
					mostly to advance the plot. We learn about the creation of the State
					of Israel, the collapse of the tension over Zionism at Hirsch, and
					the resumption of Danny and Reuven’s friendship. Once again, we
					see a relationship between personal and historical events. Tension
					only disappears at Hirsch after the fighting in Israel results in
					the death of a Hirsch alumnus. Throughout the entire novel, Potok
					carefully shows how the events that affect individual Jewish characters
					are inseparable from the larger events in Jewish history. The fighting
					in Israel touches the Jewish students’ lives, and it underscores
					the fact that tradition and modernity will always be forced into
					contact and conflict with one another.

It is important to note that Reuven imposes silence on
					Reb Saunders, refusing to listen to the old man or to come over
					for Shabbat. Again, we see that silence means many different things
					in the novel; it is not only a cruel punishment inflicted by Reb
					Saunders.	

When David Malter refuses to explain Reb Saunders’s behavior to
					Reuven, he too mimics Reb Saunders’s silent way of interacting with
					his son. During this moment of refusal, Reuven notes that his father’s
					“eyes were dark.” This description has two symbolic meanings. By
					denying his son information, David Malter is clouding his son’s
					vision. From this point of view, his dark eyes reflect the darkness
					and the lack of perspective that he is imposing on Reuven. Also, Reuven’s
					description shows that eyes are not just a tool for receiving information,
					but also a tool for displaying information. Reuven’s father’s eyes
					here reflect his internal state. It is a complex moment that implies
					that vision is a two-way process of both sending and receiving information.

Once Danny and Reuven resume their friendship, the lessons they
					have learned during their time spent apart become clearer. For example,
					even though Reuven continues to help Danny with math, something
					Danny would not be able to grasp on his own, Reuven tells Danny
					“it [is] about time he helped himself with graphs.” During the boys’
					period of isolation, Reuven learned that his friendship with Danny
					had enabled him to be a stronger person, and he realized he was
					able to help himself. At the same time, we also are reminded of
					other ways in which Danny and Reuven give one another things that
					each would not be able to get on his own. In a touching exchange,
					Danny says to Reuven that he can’t believe Reuven is going to be
					a rabbi, and Reuven responds that he can’t believe Danny is going
					to be a psychologist. Potok here points out the almost yin-yang
					relationship between Danny and Reuven. In many ways, each is the
					opposite of the other, yet they also fit together perfectly.

