The central female character of the novel. Marie Lazarre meets Nector Kashpaw as a teenager. They marry and have seven children, two of whom die. Marie takes in children from the reservation who need love and care.

Read an in-depth analysis of Marie.

A central male character of the novel. Nector marries Marie but loves Lulu. He serves as chairman of the tribe but becomes senile as he ages. At the end, he lives in a Senior Citizens home with Marie and Lulu.

Read an in-depth analysis of Nector.

Mother to eight sons and one daughter who have several different fathers. At one point, Lulu is married to Bev. Lulu is a strong, independent woman who loves deeply and passionately, and Nector is one of her love interests.

Read an in-depth analysis of Lulu.

June and Gerry’s biological son, raised by Marie and Nector. Lipsha possesses “the touch” to heal people and works at the Senior Citizens home and provides a “love medicine” that kills Nector.

Read an in-depth analysis of Lipsha.

A middle-aged, hardened Chippewa woman with a checkered past. The mother of two sons, King with Gordie, and Lipsha with Gerry Nanapush. June is daughter to Marie’s sister. June raises one son, King, and gives her other son, Lipsha, to Marie to raise. 

The only child of Zelda Kashpaw and an unknown father. A rebellious teenager, Albertine goes to medical school in Fargo. She interacts with other characters, such as Henry Lamartine Junior, Dot and Gerry Nanapush, and her cousin, Lipsha.

Eldest son to Marie and Nector, husband to June, and father to King. Gordie is abusive to his unfaithful wife and descends into severe alcoholism after her death.

Nector’s brother, a hermit who lives in the woods. Eli’s mother kept him from going to school. He befriends June after she comes to live with the Kashpaws.

Husband to Lynette, father to King Junior, and son to June and Gordie. King spends time in prison with Gerry Nanapush where he betrays his trust.

Wife of King and mother of King Junior. She and her husband have a violent and difficult marriage.

Second husband to Lulu and brother to Beverly. Henry marries Lulu after a three-way game of strip poker between himself, his brother Bev, and Lulu. He dies when a train hits his car.

Henry’s brother, at one point married to Elsa, and then Lulu’s third husband. Bev rightfully believes that Henry Junior is his son. He sells children’s workbooks door-to-door in Minneapolis.

Beverly's wife, a typist who changes jobs often. Elsa is a blond chain smoker who regularly threatens to leave Bev. She is not interested in children, the opposite of Lulu.

Son of Lulu and Beverly, conceived on the night of Henry’s funeral. He was a prisoner-of-war in Vietnam and returns from the war a damaged man. He and his brother Lyman own a red convertible together.

Mother of twelve children, including Eli and Nector.

Son of Lulu and Nector, brother to Henry Junior with whom he has a close relationship. Skilled at making money, Lyman buys a red convertible with Henry Junior and is deeply affected by his death.

A tyrannical, cold-spirited, violent nun who abuses children. She believes in the devil’s ability to possess people such as herself and Marie Lazarre. She appears as the antagonist in “Saint Marie” and again as an old dying woman in “Flesh and Blood.”

The heavy, pregnant, no-nonsense woman in “Scales.” Dot marries Gerry Nanapush and conceives a baby with him while he’s in prison. She befriends Albertine Johnson while the two women work at a truck weigh station. Dot likes to knit and gives birth to a daughter, Shawn.

Son of Lulu, Gerry spends his life revolving in and out of prison. He fathers Lipsha with June Morrissey and baby Shawn with Dot Adare. A giant of a man, he is famous for his prison escapes.

Marie and Nector’s daughter and Zelda and Gordie’s younger sister.

The mud engineer June parties with on the night she dies.

Marie and Nector’s daughter and mother to Albertine, with whom she has a tense relationship.

A nun who lives in Sacred Heart Convent. She plays the clarinet and writes music. Compassionate and willing to help a stranger, Sister Mary appears as the second character in “Crown of Thorns.”

Young son of King and Lynette who is highly intelligent. He appears as a baby in “The World’s Greatest Fishermen” and as a traumatized child in “Crossing the Water.” He prefers to go by the name of Howard.

Lulu’s last child and only daughter. Lulu gives birth to Bonita when Lulu is nearly fifty years old. Bonita’s father is a Mexican migrant, one of Lulu’s many lovers.

