The title character and protagonist of the story. Esperanza is about to turn thirteen years old and is the beloved only child of Sixto and Ramona Ortega. She is sheltered from the harder realities of those who work on her father’s ranch, El Rancho de las Rosas. Her life revolves around pretty clothes, celebrations, and the affection of her parents and grandmother, Abuelita. She is smart and stubborn, and finds comfort in daydreams and fantasies until she gains the strength and courage to adapt to her new life when tragedy strikes.

Read an in-depth analysis of Esperanza.

Esperanza’s mother. Beautiful and gentle in a way Esperanza hopes to one day be, Mama is also strong and becomes a source of inspiration for Esperanza as their lives change. She is prepared to work hard and rebuild their lives by whatever means necessary. She deeply loves her mother, Esperanza’s Abuelita. The bond of their three generations becomes a crucial part of their survival.

Read an in-depth analysis of Mama.

A worker on El Rancho de las Rosas and later on the California farm. He is the son of Alfonso and Hortensia and lifelong friend to Esperanza. Handsome and funny, Miguel is sixteen years old, strong, eager to learn, and realistic about the work he must do to better his life and that of his family. His relationship with Esperanza is sometimes strained by their different social status, and he is frustrated when Esperanza cannot see past it. Miguel calls Esperanza his “queen.”

Read an in-depth analysis of Miguel.

A migrant field worker and Esperanza’s antagonist. Marta is sixteen years old, strong-willed, intelligent, and charismatic. She speaks English as well as Spanish, unlike many of the workers. She is confident and consistently speaks up for the rights of the workers, urging them to unionize. She challenges Esperanza’s assumptions of the workers in general, and taunts Esperanza about her new circumstances.

Read an in-depth analysis of Marta.

Esperanza’s grandmother and mother to Ramona (Mama). Abuelita is loving, eccentric, patient, and clever. She is a calming influence before and after the events that change Esperanza’s life. No stranger to upheaval, Abuelita shares lessons through stories. Esperanza enjoys crocheting with Abuelita and hearing her stories, as well as learning from her courage and adaptability.

Read an in-depth analysis of Abuelita.

Esperanza’s father, a wealthy landowner and rancher in Aguascalientes, Mexico. Admired and respected by his workers, Papa adores his daughter. He tries to teach Esperanza from a young age to listen and feel for the heartbeat of the land and to live patiently and with hope for the future, whatever it brings. Papa dies at the beginning of the novel, which sets the rest of the plot’s events in motion.

Miguel’s father. He is the lead worker on El Rancho de las Rosas. He is loyal to Esperanza’s family and offers advice, caution, and connections that provide a way forward for Esperanza and Mama after tragedy.

Miguel’s mother and Alfonso’s wife. She is a housekeeper in Esperanza’s family home at El Rancho de las Rosas. She acts as a friend to Abuelita, Mama, and Esperanza.

Alfonso’s brother and sister-in-law. They are field workers, and Esperanza and her mother become part of their extended family in California when they move into part of their cabin. Juan and Josefina have three children but welcome Esperanza and her mother warmly. They are content yet pragmatic workers, willing to share whatever they can.

Juan and Josefina’s daughter. Isabel is eight years old, kind-hearted, and patient. She helps Esperanza adjust in California, teaching her how to do housework, take care of children, and understand the complex social arrangements of the different worker groups. She is content with what she has but begs Esperanza to tell her stories of her former life, with its parties, beautiful clothes, and dolls.

Juan and Josefina’s young twins. Once Isabel goes to school, Esperanza takes care of the twins until she is old enough to work. The children bond immediately with Esperanza and bring her a bit of joy and confidence.

Field workers in Esperanza’s camp. Older than Esperanza, they spend time with her often, working and taking care of children. Melina is also from Aguascalientes and knows about Esperanza’s family, though from the perspective of her friends among the ranch’s workers. Esperanza feels closer to Melina because she is younger than Irene, but Melina is also mature and a calm mother to her own little child.

A migrant field worker and Marta’s mother. A gentler presence than her daughter, she joins Marta in the workers’ strikes, though Marta is concerned for her safety.

Isabel’s best friend. She spends time with Esperanza and Isabel in the field workers’ camp.

A field worker. She shares news from other field workers’ camps with Esperanza’s group.

Sixto Ortega’s stepbrothers. They inherit El Rancho de las Rosas because women cannot inherit property. Luis is the local bank president and Marco is the town’s mayor. Luis is fond of both Mama and the possibilities of owning the ranch, but the cruelty that simmers underneath his surface is also a threat to both.

An egg seller on Esperanza’s train to California. Carmen is poor but happy, and she is talkative as the family travels. Miguel describes her as an example of kindness to those even worse off than she is.

