The protagonist and female tribute of District 12. She is an excellent hunter and tremendously resourceful.

Read an in-depth analysis of Katniss Everdeen.

The male tribute of District 12 and the son of a baker. He is kind and loyal, and he becomes Katniss’s love interest and main ally during the Hunger Games.

Read an in-depth analysis of Peeta Mellark.

Katniss’s and Peeta’s trainer. He is a drunk and one of only two people from District 12 to win the Hunger Games (and the only one still living).

Read an in-depth analysis of Haymitch Abernathy.

 

Katniss’s friend and hunting partner. Gale is probably the person closest to Katniss, and he is the only with whom she can ever fully relax and be herself.

Read an in-depth analysis of Gale Hawthorne.

Katniss’s main stylist. He becomes Katniss’s friend over the course of the story and counsels Katniss to be herself.

Read an in-depth analysis of Cinna.

Katniss’s little sister. She is small and gentle, and Katniss volunteers in her place when her name is drawn in the reaping.

Read an in-depth analysis of Primrose Everdeen.

The escort of the tributes from District 12. She is very concerned with appearances and her own career.

Katniss’s mother. After her husband died, she essentially stopped caring for Katniss and Prim, forcing Katniss to become the family’s primary provider.

The Mayor’s daughter and the only person Katniss is friendly with at school. She gives Katniss the mockingjay pin.

The mayor of District 12.

The person who waxes Katniss before she sees Cinna, her stylist.

The male tribute from District 2. He is a career tribute, meaning he has trained for the Hunger Games his entire life, and he is large, short-tempered, and a fierce fighter.

The female tribute from District 11. Katniss and Rue become allies during the Games.

A female tribute in the Hunger Games characterized by her wiliness and intelligence. She dies by eating poisonous berries collected by Peeta.

The male tribute from District 11. He shows mercy toward Katniss because of the way Katniss treated Rue.

The female tribute from District 1. She dies when Katniss drops a tracker jacker nest on her and some other tributes.

The female tribute from District 2. She actually defeats Katniss in a fight and nearly kills her, but Thresh intervenes and saves Katniss’s life.

The ostentatious television host who interviews Katniss and Peeta before and after the Games.

The announcer during the Hunger Games.

The president of Panem.

