Indira Gandhi was the prime minister of India from 1966–1977, then
				again from 1980–1984, a term that ended with her assassination.
				Indira was the daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru, India’s first prime
				minister, and the widow of Feroze Gandhi, an Indian journalist and
				politician. Though Mahatma Gandhi was a family friend and political
				ally, the two are not related.

In her first term, various political and economic reforms
				made Indira Gandhi highly popular, as did an Indian victory in the
				1971 conflict with Pakistan over the creation of an independent
				Bangladeshi state. However, in 1971, Gandhi was also found guilty
				of election fraud. Rather than face charges, Gandhi declared a State
				of Emergency, tightening her hold over the government and ushering in
				a period of drastically reduced civil liberties, as well as a severe crackdown
				on political opposition. The emergency lasted nineteen months, after
				which Gandhi—misjudging the extent of the population’s resentment—held
				an open election and lost. She stepped down but was reelected to
				office in 1980. Four years later, after a disastrous series of events
				involving Sikh activists, Indira Gandhi was assassinated by her
				Sikh bodyguards. Her son, Rajiv Gandhi, succeeded her and was also
				assassinated while in office, in 1991. The Gandhi family, however,
				continues to be a central force in Indian politics.

Long before Indira Gandhi enters Saleem’s story in a direct
				fashion, vague references to “the Widow” hint at her eventual role
				in the destruction of the midnight’s children. Her actual presence
				in the story is brief, but it is nonetheless of great significance.
				Throughout the novel, Saleem’s personal life constantly reflects
				India’s political turmoil. Finally, with the arrival of Indira Gandhi
				and the State of Emergency, Rushdie fuses the two narratives with
				a single crisis. The reforms of the emergency, which included a
				widespread campaign of forced sterilization, were widely seen as
				massive abuses of government power and human rights. The nation
				of India is metaphorically thrown into perpetual darkness just as
				Saleem’s wife, Parvati-the-witch, is killed and the magicians’ ghetto
				destroyed. By making Indira Gandhi’s campaign responsible for the
				destruction of the fictional midnight’s children, Rushdie holds
				her accountable for destroying the promise and hope of a new future
				for India. 

