Although the name Lolita has become synonymous
				with underage sexpot, Nabokov’s Lolita is simply a stubborn child.
				She is neither very beautiful nor particularly charming, and Humbert
				often remarks on her skinny arms, freckles, vulgar language, and
				unladylike behavior. Lolita attracts the depraved Humbert not because
				she is precocious or beautiful, but because she is a nymphet, Humbert’s ideal
				combination of childishness and the first blushes of womanhood.
				To nonpedophiles, Lolita would be a rather ordinary twelve-year-old
				girl. Her ordinariness is a constant source of frustration for Humbert,
				and she consistently thwarts his attempts to educate her and make
				her more sophisticated. She adores popular culture, enjoys mingling
				freely with other people, and, like most prepubescent girls, has
				a tendency toward the dramatic. However, when she shouts and rebels
				against Humbert, she exhibits more than the frustration of an ordinary
				adolescent: sheclearly feels trapped by her arrangement with Humbert,
				but she is powerless to extricate herself.

Lolita changes radically throughout the novel, despite
				aging only about six years. At the beginning, she is an innocent,
				though sexually experienced child of twelve. Humbert forces her
				transition into a more fully sexual being, but she never seems to
				acknowledge that her sexual activities with Humbert are very different
				from her fooling around with Charlie in the bushes at summer camp.
				By the end of the novel, she has become a worn-out, pregnant wife
				of a laborer. Throughout her life, Lolita sustains an almost complete
				lack of self-awareness. As an adult, she recollects her time with
				Humbert dispassionately and doesn’t seem to hold a grudge against
				either him or Quilty for ruining her childhood. Her attitude suggests
				that as a child she had nothing for them to steal, nothing important
				enough to value. Her refusal to look too deeply within herself,
				and her tendency to look forward rather than backward, might represent
				typically American traits, but Humbert also deserves part of the
				blame. Humbert objectifies Lolita, and he robs her of any sense
				of self. Lolita exists only as the object of his obsession, never
				as an individual. The lack of self-awareness in a child is typical
				and often charming. In the adult Lolita, the absence of self-awareness
				seems tragic. 

