Back in Minas Tirith, Pippin receives his new uniform
					and gear as a member of the Tower Guard. He spends a long day serving
					Lord Denethor, Gandalf, and the Captains of the West. Pippin chats
					with Beregond at the outer wall of the Citadel amid heavy darkness
					and a stagnant air. Suddenly, they hear the terrifying shriek of
					a Black Rider. Beyond the outermost gate, they can see five dark
					Nazgûl swooping over a small, rapidly approaching group of Men on horseback.
					The leader of the horsemen sounds his horn; Beregond recognizes
					the trumpet call of Faramir, Denethor’s son.

The men, thrown from their terrified horses, run for the
					city gate on foot. Just as a Nazgûl descends on Faramir, Pippin
					sees what appears to be a brilliant white star in the north—it is
					Gandalf on his horse, Shadowfax. Gandalf raises his hand and sends
					a shaft of light shooting upward into one of the Nazgûl. The Nazgûl
					cries and circles away, the other Ringwraiths following. Gandalf
					returns to the city with Faramir slumped in the saddle.

Faramir is escorted into Denethor’s chambers, where he
					is shocked to see Pippin (Faramir has already had a strange encounter with
					two other hobbits—Frodo and Sam—in The Two Towers). Gandalf
					erupts when he learns from Faramir that Frodo and Sam are heading
					to Mordor by way of Cirith Ungol. Faramir notes that he bid farewell
					to the hobbits only two days ago; they could not have reached Cirith
					Ungol yet. The men surmise that Sauron’s new movement on Gondor
					is not related to Frodo’s approach to Mordor. 

Denethor upbraids Faramir for showing cowardice in defending the
					outposts. The Steward bitterly remarks that Boromir, his other son,
					would have brought him a “mighty gift”—meaning the Ring. Gandalf
					points out that Boromir would have kept the “gift” for himself.
					The two men argue, and Pippin again senses the strain between them.
					Denethor opposes sending the Ring with a Hobbit into the hands of
					Sauron, believing that he himself should have been given the Ring
					for safekeeping. The gathering disperses. Pippin asks Gandalf why,
					as Faramir has indicated, Frodo and Sam are traveling with Gollum.
					Gandalf fears Gollum’s treachery, but notes that perhaps some good
					may yet come of Gollum’s actions.

Now that Pippin is a member of the Tower Guard, we realize
					how much his status has changed throughout the novel. When we first meet
					him, he is content to smoke and lounge about; as recently as The
						Two Towers, he has seemed more interested in leisure than
					in warfare, as when Aragorn’s group comes upon Merry and Pippin smoking
					their pipes at Isengard. The Pippin of this volume of the novel,
					however, is a warrior, or at least an aspiring one. His passage from
					the simple pleasures of food and conversation to the grave obligations
					of fighting mirrors the rite of passage that all the hobbits of
					the Fellowship are undergoing on the quest. Nonetheless, at this point
					Pippin is still not much of a fighter. His close association with the
					slender young warrior Beregond reminds us that Pippin is no seasoned
					soldier. Moreover, we see that his role in this chapter is basically
					observational rather than active. He sees the white star heralding
					Gandalf’s arrival on the back of Shadowfax, carrying Faramir with
					him—but Pippin only witnesses this heroism; he does not play any
					part in it. Nevertheless, his presence on the scene is a kind of
					achievement for him.

Denethor’s misappraisal of his two sons, Boromir and Faramir— his
					wrongful condemnation of Faramir and praise of the treacherous Boromir—recalls
					an earlier scene from The Two Towers. Previously,
					Faramir captured Frodo and Sam on suspicion that the hobbits had
					something to do with the death of Boromir, who perished under mysterious
					circumstances. Faramir hinted that the hobbits had betrayed Boromir,
					ironically unaware that it was actually Boromir who was the betrayer.
					While Frodo remained silent on that earlier occasion, unwilling
					to destroy Faramir’s faith in his deceased brother, Sam eventually
					spoke up to tell the truth, which Faramir ultimately accepted gratefully.
					Here, the situation is similar, as Denethor is unable even to imagine
					that Boromir would have kept the Ring for himself rather than presenting
					it as a gift to his father and lord. On this occasion, it is Gandalf
					who reprises Sam’s earlier role of truth-teller, revealing Boromir’s
					betrayal to a shocked family member. This parallel between the two
					scenes is one of many in The Lord of the Rings, serving
					as a unifying force that reminds us that The Lord of the
						Rings is one novel with three volumes, rather than three
					separate novels.

