[P]eople are meant to go through life
						two by two. ’Tain’t natural to be lonesome.

The Stage Manager watches the audience return from intermission, and
					announces that three years have passed. It is now July 7, 1904, just
					after commencement at the local high school. The Stage Manager tells
					us that the first act was called “Daily Life,” and that this second
					act is entitled “Love and Marriage.” He says that a third act will
					follow, and that the audience can guess what that act will be about.

	We witness another morning scene, much like the first,
					except this time it is raining heavily. Howie Newsome delivers milk
					and runs into the paperboy—now Si Crowell, the younger brother of
					Joe Crowell, Jr.—and Constable Warren. They discuss the impending marriage
					of George Gibbs. Si bemoans the fact that George will have to stop
					playing baseball. He says George was the “best baseball pitcher
					Grover’s Corners ever had.” The Constable and Si continue on their
					way, and Howie stops to chat at the Gibbs household, where Mrs.
					Gibbs is preparing for the wedding guests she expects to host later
					that day. Howie then crosses the yard and talks to Mrs. Webb. Their
					conversation reveals to the audience that George has become engaged
					to Emily Webb.

	Back in the Gibbs’s kitchen, Dr. and Mrs. Gibbs reminisce
					about the morning of their own wedding. George comes downstairs
					and announces that he is going next door to see Emily. Mrs. Gibbs makes
					him put on overshoes because of the rain. George hurries across
					the yard, but Mrs. Webb will not let him see Emily because she believes
					it is bad luck for the groom to see the bride anytime on the wedding
					day prior to the ceremony. Mr. Webb agrees with this superstition,
					and Mrs. Webb runs upstairs to make sure Emily does not come down.
					Left alone, Mr. Webb and George awkwardly discuss weddings and the
					idea of what makes a happy marriage. The Webbs then shoo George
					out of the house.

	The Stage Manager reappears and interrupts the action
					again. He announces that, before proceeding, we need to find out
					how George and Emily’s relationship began. We flash back to the
					beginning of George and Emily’s courtship, at the end of their junior
					year in high school. George and Emily appear onstage. George has
					just been elected president of his class, and Emily has been elected
					secretary and treasurer. Emily carries a handful of invisible books,
					which George offers to carry for her. As they walk home together,
					Emily remarks that a change has come over George since he became
					a local baseball star. She says he has become “conceited and stuck-up.” Although
					hurt, George takes her words to heart. Emily, suddenly mortified
					at her own bluntness, apologizes to George and begins to cry.

	George tells Emily not to be concerned and invites her
					to have an ice-cream soda with him at the local drugstore. The Stage
					Manager dons spectacles and assumes the role of the druggist, Mr.
					Morgan. Emily and George sit at the counter and talk about the future. George
					talks about his tentative plans to go to the State Agriculture School.
					Throughout the conversation, however, George weighs the idea of
					continuing his formal education against the idea of staying in Grover’s
					Corners with Emily, revealing his fondness for her.

	The Stage Manager takes off his spectacles and returns
					us to the day of the wedding. He waits and watches while stagehands
					clear away the chairs and tables and set up rows of pews at center
					stage. After announcing that he will now play the role of the clergyman and
					that the play is about to get “pretty serious,” the Stage Manager launches
					into a short sermon about the divine power that wills the existence
					of marriage and procreation and about the importance of marriage
					in human history.

	The congregation streams in and fills the pews. Mrs.
					Webb enters last, and before she sits down, she turns toward the
					audience and talks for a moment about how girls lack adequate preparation
					for marriage. George makes his way from the back of the theater through
					the audience and toward the altar onstage. A group of George’s baseball
					teammates heckle him good-naturedly, and the Stage Manager orders
					them offstage. At the front of the church, George withdraws nervously.
					When his mother leaves her seat and advances, he anxiously tells
					her that he does not want to grow up and get married. After George
					finally comes to his senses, Mrs. Gibbs fixes his tie. Emily, also
					feeling jittery, enters in her wedding dress and confesses her own
					apprehensions to her father. A choir has begun singing “Blessed
					Be the Tie That Binds.” Mr. Webb tries to calm his daughter and
					then calls George over. Putting his arm around the couple, Mr. Webb
					tells George he is content to give away his daughter. His encouragement
					solaces George and Emily, who proceed with the wedding.

	The Stage Manager begins the service, but Mrs. Soames
					drowns out his words while chattering noisily about how “lovely”
					she finds the wedding. After George and Emily exchange rings and
					a kiss, the scene freezes briefly in a tableau, and the Stage Manager,
					still acting as the clergyman, muses about the number of couples
					he has married over time. Without cynicism, he remarks that one
					in a thousand wedding ceremonies is interesting. The scene comes
					back to life as an organ plays the “Wedding March,” and George and
					Emily run to the audience and down the aisle. The Stage Manager
					announces the end of Act II and a ten-minute intermission.

The similarity between the morning activities in Act I
					and Act II implies that an underlying stability defines life in
					Grover’s Corners, despite the onset of marriage and other indications
					of individual growth and maturation. Though the Stage Manager says
					that several years have passed since Act I, very little in the town
					seems to have changed. Howie Newsome still delivers milk, a member
					of the Crowell family still delivers the papers, and the train whistle
					stills blows at 5:45 every
					morning. The Stage Manager’s description of the passing of time
					emphasizes the difference between individual change and broader
					change. On an individual level, “babies that weren’t even born before
					have begun talking regular sentences already; and a number of people
					who thought they were right young and spry have noticed that they
					can’t bound up a flight of stairs like they used to.” On a more
					general level, the Stage Manager notes the slow shifts in geology,
					saying that weather and erosion have gradually worn the mountains.
					Even though, as he says, “millions of gallons of water went by the
					mill” and the “sun’s come up over a thousand times,” these natural
					and environmental forces remain cyclical and steadfast.

	Despite the fact that flashbacks typically heighten the
					sense that individual human lives pass quickly, the Stage Manager
					uses flashbacks to contribute to the sense of general stability.
					Here, he uses the technique of flashback to slow down time. He interrupts
					George and Emily’s wedding day and returns to the moment at which
					their romantic relationship begins. In this case, the flashback
					offers a comparison between the two scenes that emphasizes the play’s
					focus on stability. Emily and George’s nervousness at the drugstore counter
					mirrors their wedding day jitters. Although the idea of a wedding
					suggests that the two young people should have matured, Emily and
					George remain childlike in their anxiousness. Comforting their children,
					the parents demonstrate the constancy of the dynamic between parent
					and child. This relation of thematically similar but temporally
					separated scenes implies that past, present, and future all bear
					a striking resemblance to each other.

	The relationship between George and Emily comprises the
					central narrative of the play. Wilder traces the progression of
					George and Emily’s love from initial neighborly friendliness to
					later romantic affection and marriage, and ultimately to grief over
					the loss of a loved one. With its rather generic emotions and rituals,
					Emily and George’s relationship is representative of a broad spectrum
					of relationships in the play—including those of Dr. and Mrs. Gibbs
					and Mr. and Mrs. Webb—but it is the only relationship we see in
					its entirety, from start to finish. Wilder foregrounds George and
					Emily, suggesting that the couple’s experience, with love as a central
					component, epitomizes the human experience. This focus on their
					relationship emphasizes one of the play’s central themes, the human need
					for interaction and companionship. Throughout the course of the
					play we listen in on conversations among brothers and sisters, schoolmates,
					adults and children, choir members, and neighbors. Romantic love
					represents the most powerful version of this desire for companionship,
					for communion with another human being.

	Though Emily and George are the central figures in Act
					II, their parents also feature prominently. Dr. and Mrs. Gibbs use
					the wedding day as an opportunity to reflect on their own marriage,
					which is portrayed as being quite happy. The Gibbses ponder the
					complex aspects of love, especially the fears that accompany a wedding
					and the difficulties of raising a family. The anxieties that await
					Emily and George are the same ones that awaited Dr. and Mrs. Gibbs
					years ago. The wedding ceremony itself is not the only ritual passed
					from generation to generation. Other elements, such as the bride
					and groom’s cold feet and the challenges of handling the practicalities
					of married life, are just as enduring.

	Wilder infuses Act II with a sense of tradition. The
					Stage Manager’s discussion of the specific details of George and
					Emily’s wedding is accompanied by a discussion of the universal
					ideas surrounding the tradition of marriage. This sense of tradition
					is emphasized by the sanctity of the choir’s music, the formality
					of the wedding rituals, and the inevitable comparisons drawn between
					the newlyweds and older married couples. The Stage Manager’s comment
					that only “[o]nce in a thousand times [is marriage] interesting”
					suggests the generic, traditional quality of the wedding ceremony.
					Wilder implies that, in general, the significance of an individual
					marriage lies in its relation to the greater human condition. Indeed,
					much of the play’s action would be unremarkable if taken out of
					the context of the philosophical and metaphysical ramblings of its
					characters. Act II illustrates the essence of young love: Wilder does
					not intend the activities and daily lives of the inhabitants of Grover’s
					Corners to interest us in and of themselves, but rather to encapsulate
					the nature of life.

