I sometimes wonder if anyone will ever
						. . . overlook my ingratitude and not worry about whether or not
						I’m Jewish and merely see me as a teenager badly in need of some
						good, plain fun.

Bep is forced to stay away from the annex for six weeks
					because of an outbreak of diphtheria at her house. Margot continues
					the Latin correspondence course using Bep’s name. Mr. Dussel fights
					with Mrs. van Daan, who thinks he and the rest of the annex should
					go to dinner in honor of his first anniversary of living there.
					Anne notes that Mr. Dussel has not once thanked them for taking
					him into the annex. At night, she dreams that she sees Hanneli,
					who asks Anne to rescue her. Anne regrets not treating Hanneli better
					and feels guilty that she is still relatively safe while Hanneli
					is suffering. 

St. Nicholas Day comes again, and Anne decorates a laundry basket
					with colorful paper and fills it with shoes. She and her father write
					verses and put one in each shoe. Anne comes down with the flu and
					receives an assortment of supposed remedies. Everyone exchanges
					Christmas and Hanukkah presents, but spirits are low because the
					war is at an impasse. Anne is still grateful that her situation
					is better than that of other Jewish children, but she cannot help feeling
					jealous of Mrs. Kleiman’s children. Her children can go outside
					and play with friends, while Anne’s family and friends are trapped
					in the annex like “lepers.”

	Anne dreams about Hanneli again and also about her own grandmother.
					She wonders whether Hanneli is still alive. Later, Anne reads through
					her diary and is shocked at how negatively she wrote of her mother
					in past entries. Anne thinks she has grown wiser since then and
					now understands her mother better. She sees herself as an adolescent
					now and says that when she is having her period she feels like she
					has a “sweet secret.” Anne also mentions the ecstasy she feels at
					seeing a female nude, such as the Venus de Milo statue, and she
					talks about how she once had a “terrible desire” to kiss a female
					friend. Now that she has no female friends, she is so desperate
					for someone to talk to that she begins to confide in Peter van Daan.
					Anne also dreams about Peter Schiff, an older friend on whom she
					had a long crush. She tells the story of their relationship and
					says that she does not need a photograph of Peter because his face
					is still clear in her mind.

	Anne and Peter talk about a cat, Boche. Peter says that
					Boche is a tomcat and turns the cat over to show Anne his genitalia.
					Anne says that she knows the female sexual organ is called the vagina,
					but she does not know what the male sexual organ is called. Peter
					says he will ask his parents. Anne is impressed that Peter can discuss
					such things without any shame.

Anne’s dreams in this section demonstrate how deeply the
					war haunts her. The fears, loneliness, and insecurities that she
					feels uncomfortable expressing out loud emerge in her dreams about Hanneli
					and her grandmother. Anne assumes that Hanneli has been deported
					to the concentration camps. She knows that she is powerless to save
					her friends, yet she feels guilty that they are suffering and she
					is not. Despite acknowledging her relatively good fortune thus far,
					Anne is envious of the non-Jewish children in Amsterdam who can
					still play and move about freely.

The appearance of Anne’s grandmother in her dream emphasizes Anne’s
					longing for security. Anne imagines that her grandmother is her
					guardian angel and will protect her. She attempts to find comfort from
					the stability of previous generations embodied in the protective,
					maternal figure of her grandmother. Anne’s dreams reflect the profound
					feelings of sadness and loneliness that she feels she must put aside
					for the good of the group. Anne acknowledges the reality of their
					situation and realizes that if they all succumbed to their feelings
					of anxiety and depression, living in the annex would become unbearable.

	As Anne goes through puberty, we see her becoming more mature,
					thoughtful, and more aware of her body. Her confinement forces her
					to struggle with many of the questions of adolescence by herself,
					since there are no other girls her age with whom she could share
					her experiences. Thus, the diary becomes an important tool for Anne’s
					self-discovery and maturity. She starts to feel disconnected from
					“the Anne of last year” as she looks over past diary entries about
					her mother, which she now considers the product of her immaturity
					and girlish moods. Anne has a record of all of her private yet indignant
					temper tantrums, which allows her to see how much she has changed
					in such a short time. Writing in the diary allows Anne to express
					her unkind and indulgent emotions and explore her own personal desires
					in a way that will not hurt anyone else. Anne’s candor caused Otto
					Frank to cut many parts of the diary in its original publication.
					Anne’s judgments, though at times cruel, are an important aspect
					of her personality and her experiences. Anne’s written outbursts
					provide a full sense of who she is and how she changes while she
					is in the annex.

	With her diary as her only confidant, Anne misses both
					her female and male friends, and she thinks often of her love, Peter Schiff.
					She is drawn to Peter van Daan, since he is the only young man sharing
					her experience. Anne is naturally curious about Peter because he
					is a teenage male, and as a girl in puberty, she is fascinated by
					his body. Anne’s discussion of the cat’s genitalia represents an
					important moment for her, since it allows her to confront sexuality
					openly and with a male for the first time. Without female friends to
					discuss her innermost secrets, Anne learns about herself the only way
					she can, through introspection and through interactions with her
					limited environment.

