This is to be a different kind of History, the narrator informs us, one that
					chooses carefully where to devote its "Pains" and "Paper." The narrator invokes
					the simile of a lottery, declaring that he will focus on the prizes drawn, not
					on the blanks. The narrator dubs himself "the Founder of a new Province of
					Writing" and states that this entitles him to operate by his own laws, which
					readers will have to respect. The narrator hopes that the Reader will recognize
					his authority, but he promises not be a tyrant nor to make the readers his
					slaves.

Eight months after Miss Bridget and Captain Blifil's wedding, Miss Bridget
					gives birth to a boy. Even though Mr. Allworthy relishes the fact that his
					sister has given birth to an heir, it does not diminish his love for the
					foundling, whom he has named Thomas after himself, and for whom he has
					taken on the role of godfather. Allworthy visits the baby Tom in his nursery at
					least once a day. Allworthy tells Bridget that her son will be brought up with
					Tom, and after some resistance, she finally agrees. The Captain voices more
					opposition than his wife by quoting scripture about the unworthy status of
					children born out of wedlock. Allworthy counters with his own set of quotations,
					arguing that children are born innocent and should not have to bear their
					parents' guilt. The truth is that the Captain envies Allworthy's attentions to
					Tom. Miss Bridget, while verbally abusing Allworthy and Tom behind their backs,
					has a tongue of honey in public. Mrs. Deborah, the narrator concludes, has
					discovered Tom's rascal of a father.

The narrator explains the history of Tom's mother, Jenny Jones, and the
					schoolmaster, Mr. Partridge. Although Partridge and his shrew of a wife have
					been married for nine years, they have no children. The narrator confides that
					the reason for this is that "Children are rightly called the Pledges of Love;
					and [Partridge]  had given [his wife] no such Pledges" Terrified
					that her husband will be less abstinent with other women, Mrs. Partridge
					handpicks her maidservants, choosing the least attractive women. Jenny Jones is
					one such maidservants.

Jenny, however, is allowed to set aside her housework in order to pursue her
					studies with Mr. Partridge. One day, about four years after Jenny has arrived,
					Mrs. Partridge strolls past her husband's study and notices Jenny suddenly rise
					up from her reading. Mrs. Partridge interprets this as evidence that Jenny and
					her husband are having an affair. She believes that their guilt is proven beyond
					reasonable doubt when, at dinner, she witnesses Jenny smiling when Partridge
					asks her to "give him some drink" in Latin. Mrs. Partridge glares at Jenny, who
					blushes. Taking this blush as even further corroboration, Mrs. Partridge grabs a
					knife and threatens Jenny and her husband. Jenny escapes by running from the
					room, while Partridge simply sits and trembles. That night Mrs. Partridge orders
					Jenny to leave her house. Jenny protests her innocence, but Partridge does not
					defend her. Instead, he wins back his wife's favor by making love to her.
					Partridge is secretly happy that Jenny has been dismissed, since the girl was
					beginning to exceed his intellectual heights.

Mrs. Partridge, once frigid, now lavishes her husband with affection. However,
					the narrator warns, this is the calm before the storm, for the women in the
					parish now report that Jenny has given birth to a second bastard. Since it is
					less than nine months since Mrs. Partridge ousted Jenny, Mrs. Partridge assumes
					that Mr. Partridge must also be the father of this child. Tearing home, Mrs.
					Partridge attacks her husband, scratching him into a bloody mess. He attempts to
					restrain her, but she fights so furiously that her cap falls off, and the
					"stays" at the front of her dress split open, leaving her breasts exposed. Mad
					with terror, Mr. Partridge runs into the street imploring his neighbors to help
					his wife. A gaggle of women attend to him. Mrs. Partridge slanders her husband,
					accusing him of wrenching off her cap and stays, pulling hair from her head, and
					beating her. Mr. Partridge, his face scarred from his wife's nails, stands
					stunned and speechless. The parish women, interpreting this silence as guilt,
					scream at his insolence.
				

Rumors begin to fly around the Little Baddington parish that Partridge has
					beaten his wife. Different reasons are given for Partridge's behavior: some
					report that he was having an affair, while others believe that Mrs.
					Partridge is the guilty party. Mrs. Wilkins scavenges for information that
					might reduce Allworthy's affection for Tom in an effort to please the
					Captain. When she hears that Partridge is Tom's father, she passes the news on
					to Captain Blifil. Instead of rewarding Mrs. Wilkins, however, the Captain, who
					does not want to ally himself with a servant for fear of being blackmailed,
					dismisses Mrs. Wilkins.

Mrs. Wilkins says nothing to Mr. Allworthy, nor does she mention her secret to
					Mrs. Blifil, with whom her friendship has faded due to their differing opinions
					of Tom. Captain Blifil debates the meaning of "Charity" with Allworthy. The
					Captain believes that "Charity" does not stipulate the actual distribution of
					money, whereas Mr. Allworthy believes that it does. At the conclusion of the
					conversation, the Captain subtly drops the news that Partridge is Tom's father.
					Allworthy summons Mrs. Wilkins to corrobate the story, which she does. The
					Captain advises Allworthy to treat Partridge with mercy.

The news of Partridge's guilt comes as a shock to Allworthy, who is the
					only person in the county who has not already heard the rumors. Mrs. Wilkins,
					having been sent to unearth more evidence of the scandal, returns to Allworthy
					with "confirmation," which is actually the word of a neighbor. The Partridge
					couple appears before Allworthy to make their "Defence." Allworthy, in the Chair
					of Justice, first listens to Mrs. Partridge's story. Mr. Partridge then
					proclaims his innocence, at which point Mrs. Partridge bursts into tears and
					launches into further accusations, now attesting that Mr. Partridge has had
					affairs with numerous women. The narrator takes this opportunity to refer to
					the common law, which states that a wife cannot provide evidence either for or
					against her husband. Mr. Partridge pleads that Jenny be allowed to testify to
					his innocence, but a messenger who is sent to find her brings the news that
					Jenny has run away with a recruiting officer. Allworthy decides that the
					testimony of "such a Slut" could not be trusted, and that Mrs. Partridge has won
					the case. Mr. Partridge loses his annuity and falls into slothful poverty. Mrs.
					Partridge dies of smallpox shortly after. Mr. Partridge leaves the county.

In spite of what Captain Blifil hopes, Allworthy's affections for Tom
					are steadily increasing, and the narrator observes that it is as though
					Allworthy feels a need to atone for his severity to Partridge through extra
					affection for Tom. This disgruntles the Captain, who fears that Tom's existence
					will lessen his own inheritance. Captain Blifil and Bridget's marriage has
					rapidly descended from infatuation to hatred. Their religious views are
					diametrically opposed, and the narrator reveals that during their courtship, the
					Captain made a point of conceding to Bridget even when he did not agree. Now
					that the Captain has no reason to comply with Bridget, he belittles her
					arguments. They remain together, however, because, the narrator philosophizes,
					married couples sometimes find more enjoyment in tormenting one another than in
					being separated. Although Allworthy notices the tenstion, he does not realize
					the magnitude of the discord, and the Captain and Bridget try to conceal it
					before him. In spite of his noble character, Allworthy "might" notice some flaws
					in the Captain, but the narrator condones this, since he believes that a
					good friend will recognize the faults of others and not try to cure them.
				

Captain Blifil meditates on how much he will inherit, and what improvements he
					will make to Allworthy's house and gardens once Allworthy has died. Captain
					Blifil's greed prompts him to lay his hands on every book available about life
					expectancy, from which he calculates how long he will have to wait for
					Allworthy's death. One night, as he takes his solitary evening walk to ponder
					such questions, Captain Blifil dies of Apoplexy.

Mr. Allworthy, concerned about the Captain's absence from the dinner table,
					orders the outside bell to be rung. Allworthy himself heads for the gardens
					while a friend who has joined them for dinner attempts to calm Bridget down
					with words and wine. When Allworthy returns, silent and upset, Bridget wails and
					laments that someone must have murdered her husband. Suddenly a servant bursts
					in, crying that the Captain has been found. Two servants carry in his dead body,
					and Allworthy weeps at the sight, while Bridget screams and faints. Two doctors
					Dr. Y. and Dr. Z., arrive and debate the cause of death. Each doctor has a
					favorite disease that he invokes for every autopsy. Although Captain Blifil is
					now confirmed to be dead, Dr. Y and Dr. Z need to invent an excuse to stay
					longer so they will receive more money. Bridget remains bed-ridden for a month
					and Allworthy generously commissions an epitaph for the Captain's grave.

At first sight the narrator seems to treat all of his characters with deference,
					but on closer inspection, we notice Fielding's irony toward his characters. For
					example, Fielding slyly undercuts Partridge's authority by describing Partridge
					as a "Pedagogue" rather than as a "teacher." The names Fielding chooses for
					characters are also parodies, following the eighteenth-century custom of using
					names that magnify the essential qualities of each character. Allworthy, for
					instance, is a genuinely worthy man, a moral yardstick against which the other
					characters should be evaluated.

However, Book II introduces us to Allworthy's greatest flaw, which is that he is
					unable to perceive the cunning and conniving of others. While this may be a
					minor flaw, one that stems from virtue rather than vice, Allworthy's inability
					to sport the machinations of others drives much of the plot of Tom Jones.
					It may seem contradictory that Fielding has constructed this character with a
					flaw, but Allworthy's characterization is consistent with the narrator's stated
					refusal to believe that anyone can be perfect. This attitude was a precocious
					one in the eighteenth century, and distinguishes Fielding from authors such as
					Samuel Richardson, who intended for his novels to be read as instruction manuals
					for morality. Fielding desires to record life more accurately, and this desire
					demands the creation of imperfect characters.

The lack of perfect characters in Tom Jones does not mean that the novel is
					devoid of morality. Indeed, Book II centers on Allworthy's kindness to the
					foundling child, Tom. Many of the characters, particularly Captain Blifil and
					Mrs. Wilkins, condemn Allworthy's decision to keep the boy, arguing that he is
					thereby supporting "Vice." Yet the narrator subtly reveals how the characters
					most critical of Allworthy's decision to raise Tom are driven by questionable
					motives in their own right. In such a way, Fielding allows questions of morality
					to take the form of debates among his characters, rather than writing dogmatic
					authoritative lectures. The lengthy debate between the Captain and Allworthy on
					the topic of "Charity" indicates Fielding's interest in solving moral dilemmas
					through philosophy rather than religion. Philosophy, Fielding implies, presents
					a variety of questions but no definitive answers.
				

