One of the novel’s protaganists. Lina is twelve years old, and lives with her grandmother and baby sister. Lina works as a messenger and takes good care of her grandmother and sister, whom she loves very much.

Read an in-depth analysis of Lina Mayfleet.

One of the novel’s protaganists. Doon is twelve years old and lives with his father. He works in the Pipeworks. He is a good son and wants to make his father proud. He and Lina were good friends when they were younger.

Read an in-depth analysis of Doon Harrow.

Doon’s father. He is a thoughtful man and a good father to Doon. He runs a shop that sells useful small objects.

Read an in-depth analysis of Loris Harrow.

Head of the Greenhouse where Lina’s father used to work. She is a deliberate, trustworthy person, and is very kind to Lina.

Read an in-depth analysis of Clary Laine.

Lina’s neighbor. She is a gentle woman who brings order and comfort to Lina and Poppy’s lives.

Read an in-depth analysis of Mrs. Murdo.

Lina’s grandmother. She loves Lina and Poppy but has a difficult time caring for them due to her old age. She runs a yarn shop beneath their apartment. Her short-term memory is failing but she remembers things that happened long ago. Her grandfather was the seventh mayor of Ember.

Lina’s baby sister. She is old enough to babble and to walk on her own. She has a sweet nature and is very curious about her surroundings. 

The Mayor of Ember, and the main antagonist. He likes to hear himself talk, but doesn’t much care for the opinions of others. He tells the people of Ember what he thinks they want to hear, and thinks that he knows what is best for everyone. He enjoys the power of his position and wielding it over others. He remembers slights and holds a grudge against those who challenge him. He is not an honest man.

Lina’s best friend from school. She is twelve years old and works in the Supply Depot. She is very talkative, and doesn’t seem to care if the person she is talking to is listening or not. She is preoccupied with the mundane details of her own life, and is somewhat vain. Her morals are flexible when it is convenient for her.

A Supply Depot employee a few years older than Lina and Doon. He is manipulative and opportunistic.

Lina’s boss. She is a kind and competent woman who treats Lina with kindness.

An assistant guard who works the desk at the Gathering Hall. 

The Chief Guard. He takes his job very seriously, and seems to enjoy bossing other people around.

A Supply Depot clerk. He is not mentally stable.

The head of the storerooms.

