Born to the village headman, Rukmani is spoiled by her social station in
				the village. When she is twelve and ready to become a bride, she expects a grand
				wedding like her older sisters enjoyed. However, her family’s circumstances have
				declined under British rule, and Rukmani is married to Nathan, a landless tenant
				farmer. When she first sees the mud hut Nathan prepared for her, she compares it
				in her mind to her father’s fine house and sinks to the ground in fear and
				despair. Yet instead of ranting or pouting, Rukmani notices Nathan’s pleading
				expression and reassures him. After this difficult beginning, Rukmani continues
				to call upon and develop her better nature. She learns the chores of a farmer’s
				wife and soon improves upon them by growing a superlative vegetable garden.
				Rukmani is closely associated with the earth and draws spiritual strength from
				its fertility and beauty. She learns to help other women in childbirth, to adapt
				to and accept the unpleasant changes the tannery brings to the village, and to
				withstand seasons of want and hunger. Instead of petulance, Rukmani exhibits
				tenacious and life-affirming endurance.

Rukmani faces loss after loss over the years, and as her endurance is
				continuously tested, her capacity for anger intensifies—but her spirit also
				grows. Kunthi arouses her rage by suggesting several times that Rukmani is
				sexually involved with Kenny. The first time, Rukmani grabs her and shakes her
				so furiously her sari drops away. The second time, Rukmani’s wrath so overpowers
				her that she longs to kill Kunthi. Finally, in a murderous rage, Rukmani attacks
				and almost kills Ira, mistaking her for Kunthi. After this near disaster,
				Rukmani finds peace by telling Nathan the truth, forgiving him for his
				transgressions, and learning to control her anger so she is never again tempted
				to injure another person. Rather, Rukmani grows in generosity and compassion.
				She gives up the strictures of caste when her sons go to work in the tannery,
				and she gives up the tradition of shame when her daughter turns to prostitution.
				Rukmani forgives her daughter-in-law for failing her duty to help them, and she
				learns to judge strangers not by their differences but by their deeds and their
				hearts. Finally, she extends her love and care to Puli, a child even more
				destitute than she is. By the end of the novel, Rukmani has
				conquered the hardships of her existence.
			

