“We are commanded to study His Torah!
						We are commanded to sit in the light of the Presence! It is for this
						that we were created!”

Reuven and his father wake up early on Shabbat morning
					and walk to synagogue together. They return home, eat lunch, and
					then Reuven falls asleep thinking about the colors of Billy’s and
					Danny’s eyes.

	Three hours later, Reuven wakes to find Danny standing
					over him. Danny suggests they walk over to his shul so that Reuven
					can meet Reb Saunders. As they walk, the boys tell each other about their
					families. Reuven explains he has no siblings because his mother
					died shortly after he was born. Danny says he has a younger sister
					and a younger brother. The boys then discover that they were born
					only two days apart. Danny also explains that his father is a great
					man who saved the members of his community from persecution by bringing
					them to America after World War I, a journey made in the face of
					great adversity. He also explains that Reb Saunders’ older brother
					vanished, so Reb Saunders inherited his father’s position. Danny
					notes that because his father is a tzaddik, considered a bridge
					between his followers and God, his congregation will follow him
					anywhere. 

	At Danny’s father’s shul, Reuven and Danny meet a crowd
					of black-caftaned Hasids who part like the Red Sea when Danny approaches.
					As the boys enter the brownstone, Danny explains that the shul is
					on the bottom floor and his family lives on the top two stories.

	The synagogue soon fills with Hasidim who have come for
					the afternoon service. Two men approach Danny and ask him to resolve an
					argument over a passage of Talmud, which Danny interprets masterfully.
					Danny’s father comes downstairs, and the room is suddenly quiet.
					Danny introduces his friend to his father, and Reb Saunders remarks
					that he is interested in getting to know the son of David Malter.

	Following the afternoon service, the men sit down at
					the table for a ritual Shabbat meal led by Reb Saunders. He concludes
					the meal with an impassioned talk, using Talmudic quotes from several
					great rabbis to argue that Jews are obligated to serve God’s will
					by studying Torah. It is through the study of Torah, Reb Saunders
					says, that God listens to mankind. Reb Saunders also uses gematriya—numerological
					manipulations of Hebrew words and phrases—to prove his point. 

Following his talk, Reb Saunders asks Danny if he noticed
					any mistakes or inconsistencies in his argument. Danny replies that
					his father misattributed one quote. Reb Saunders then asks Danny
					several detailed follow-up questions, and the two launch into an extended
					discussion of Talmudic precepts. The assembled crowd of Hasidim
					is obviously pleased by Danny’s quick and sharp answers. Reuven
					realizes that the whole speech was one great quiz—Reb Saunders made
					deliberate errors to see if his son would notice and correct him.

	Finally, Reb Saunders asks Danny if there were any additional mistakes.
					When Danny shakes his head, Reb Saunders quietly chastises him for
					not listening carefully and turns to Reuven, asking the same question.
					Reuven, terrified and astonished that he is being asked to correct
					a great tzaddik, tentatively points out a mistake in Reb Saunders’s
					gematriya. Reb Saunders and Danny, along with the entire crowd,
					are delighted at Reuven’s intelligence.

	After the evening service, Reb Saunders praises Reuven
					and approves of his friendship with Danny. Danny walks Reuven part
					of the way home, and the boys happily discover that they both plan
					to study at the same Jewish college following high school.

	Reuven returns home and finds that his father has been
					worried about him because he has been out so late. Reuven apologizes
					and tells his father about his experience at Reb Saunders’s shul,
					noting that he thought Reb Saunders’s quiz was cruel. David Malter
					replies that it is important to display knowledge in public, but
					that he finds Reb Saunders’s intentional mistakes distasteful. Mr.
					Malter then says he is proud of his son. He reminds Reuven not to
					read until his eye heals, and then they go to sleep.

Chapter 7 is a crucial turning
					point in The Chosen, marking Reuven’s entry into
					Danny Saunders’s world. Potok begins the chapter by focusing upon
					Reuven’s Shabbat experience with his own father, allowing us to
					contrast David Malter’s religious worship with Reb Saunders’s. At
					first, this contrast seems stark and obvious. Reb Saunders is distant
					towards Danny, while David Malter is open and intimate with Reuven.
					Reb Saunders speaks furiously and almost demagogically about religion,
					while earlier in the chapter, we see David Malter praying silently
					and fervently. Reb Saunders preaches that the world is contaminated
					and implies that devout believers must remove themselves from all
					earthly concerns. In contrast, at the Malter’s apartment, the litany
					of pictures and maps on the wall imply a commitment to and respect
					for earthly concerns.

	However, upon closer inspection, there are many similarities between
					the two fathers. Both are devoutly committed to religion, and both
					share a deep, profound knowledge of Jewish law. Reuven is careful
					to point out that the Talmudic discussion between Danny and Reb
					Saunders isn’t about showing off or impressing others with their
					brilliant arguments. Instead, Reuven says, “they seemed more interested
					in. . .straightforward knowledge.” That David Malter supports Reb
					Saunder’s public quizzes goes against our expectations and drives
					home the similarities between Reuven and Danny’s fathers. David
					Malter’s reaction to Reuven’s story reminds us that Danny and Reuven’s
					situations are not as different as they appear.

	Several events in Chapter 7 enhance
					our understanding of other aspects of the novel. During Reb Saunder’s
					quiz, Reuven sees Danny’s face curl into the same vicious grin that
					Reuven saw at the softball game. Reuven is frightened, because he
					knows Danny makes this expression when he has the urge to kill someone. Danny’s
					grimace recalls the anger and competitiveness of the softball game
					and connects his violent behavior at the game with his resentment
					toward his father. Another important revelation occurs when Reb
					Saunders mentions that the gematriya for chai, a significant Hebrew
					word meaning “life,” is eighteen. We realize that The Chosen is
					divided into eighteen chapters in allusion to the numerical value
					of this important Hebrew word. Also, when Danny mentions that Reb
					Saunders became tzaddik because Reb Saunders’s older brother abandoned
					the lineage, we see that Danny’s own desire to abandon his traditional
					duty in order to study psychology is not new to his family. Danny’s
					situation parallels the situation his uncle’s a generation before.

	At one point, Reb Saunders passionately declares, “It
					is not the world that is commanded to study Torah, but the people
					of Israel!” This statement underscores Reb Saunders’s belief in
					a dichotomy between the outside world and Jewish tradition. On a
					deeper level, Reb Saunders’s statement refers to the novel’s title,
					interpreting what it means to be a member of the “Chosen People.”
					Reb Saunders argues that Jews, by virtue of their birth, must bear
					unique burdens that give privilege as well as obligation. This definition
					of “chosen” implies a sense of separation from the outside world,
					but also a sense of entitlement. Both Reuven and Danny struggle
					to reconcile their unique obligations with their feelings of obligation
					to the outside world.

