The day after Lancelot defends Guenever’s honor, Nimue
					arrives and confirms that Guenever is innocent of poisoning the
					knight who died. This announcement comes as part of her promise
					to Merlyn to look after Arthur. Arthur decides to hold a tournament
					to celebrate Guenever’s acquittal.

Lancelot visits Elaine, who tells him that he must now
					stay with her. He agrees to wear her favor, a red sleeve, on his
					helmet during the tournament. Lancelot fights valiantly, but is
					wounded near the end of the tournament when three knights attack
					him at once. When Guenever hears about Elaine’s favor, she becomes
					jealous and angry, convinced that Lancelot loves Elaine.

When Lancelot returns to Camelot, he and Guenever fight.
					Finally aware that Lancelot does not love her and will never return
					to her, Elaine commits suicide. Her body is put in a barge, which
					drifts down to Camelot for all to see. At the sight of her dead
					rival, Guenever is filled with pity.

At another tournament soon after Elaine’s suicide, the
					lines between the Round Table’s factions become clear. Arthur sides
					against Lancelot for the first time, and Gareth sides with Lancelot
					against his own brothers. One day, Lancelot and Arthur hear that
					Guenever has been captured by a knight named Sir Meliagrance who
					has secretly been in love with her.

Meliagrance sets an ambush for Lancelot, but Lancelot
					manages to get through it and into the castle where Guenever is
					held captive. Meliagrance, knowing he will lose any battle with
					Lancelot, gives up and begs Guenever to forgive him. Lancelot consents
					to Guenever’s request not to kill Meliagrance.

That night, Lancelot cuts through the bars of the window
					of Guenever’s room, and the two sleep together for the first time
					in a long while. Lancelot cuts his hand as he breaks into her room.
					The next morning, Meliagrance discovers Lancelot’s blood on Guenever’s bed
					and accuses her of sleeping with one of the knights who guard her
					chamber, many of whom were wounded when she was kidnapped. Guenever
					denies the accusation. Her denial is accurate, since Lancelot is
					not one of the knights guarding her chamber. Lancelot offers to
					defend Guenever’s honor in combat. Meliagrance, knowing he is no
					match for Lancelot, traps him in a dungeon in his castle.

Lancelot manages to persuade the girl who serves his meals
					to help him, and he escapes Meliagrance’s dungeon and shows up for
					the challenge. Lancelot knocks Meliagrance off his horse in their
					first joust. Meliagrance begs for mercy. Lancelot looks to Guenever,
					who indicates that Meliagrance should be killed. Although the crowd agrees
					with Guenever, Lancelot does not kill Meliagrance outright. Instead,
					he handicaps himself by removing half his armor and tying his left
					hand behind his back. He then fights Meliagrance again and wins
					easily, cutting Meliagrance’s head in half.

After the incident with Meliagrance, Camelot
					seems to be at peace again. Lancelot and Guenever are happy together,
					and Arthur does his best to ignore their affair. A man named Sir
					Urre, who has been cursed with wounds that will not heal, comes
					to Camelot in the hope that the best knight in the world will be
					able to heal him. All the knights place their hands on him, but
					to no avail. Finally Lancelot, who has been hiding in his room,
					afraid of failure, lays his hands on the man and cures him. The
					room bursts into a frenzy of celebration, except for Lancelot, who
					cries to himself like a child who has been beaten.

A lot occurs in these short, transitional chapters, but
					we get the sense that these are only loose ends being wrapped up
					before the story comes to its conclusion. Whereas “The Queen of
					Air and Darkness” ends with the disastrous liaison of Morgause and
					Arthur, “The Ill-Made Knight” concludes somewhat happily. The book ends
					with a burst of jubilation, and Camelot feels like a place of uneasy
					but real peace. After the chaos of the Holy Grail period, Camelot
					returns to the status quo. Certain story lines are brought to a
					close, and some secondary figures make their final exits. For example,
					Elaine commits suicide and thus no longer interferes with Lancelot’s
					relationship with Guenever, eliminating a source of tension in Lancelot’s
					and Guenever’s lives.

The tone of these last chapters, however, feels almost
					sad, and even the greatest deeds are tainted. Lancelot is finally
					able to perform a miracle as the best knight in the world, but he
					does so in spite of his sins, not because of his accomplishments.
					Guenever is acquitted on a technicality of committing adultery with
					one of her knights. Her honor is defended, but only because her
					champion proves to be stronger than her accuser. The three main
					characters, despite their sins, are able to remain in their roles,
					but only because they become resigned to the lie they live. The
					optimistic sense that things will resolve themselves is gone. When
					Lancelot heals Sir Urre, he cries because it seems to him that even
					miracles have lost their sincerity. Lancelot is not perfect, and
					the fact the he is allowed to perform miracles despite his sinfulness
					makes the whole endeavor seem cheap to him.

In these chapters we see also that Lancelot is a man
					who is fundamentally torn. He is both humble and proud, both ambitious
					and self-loathing, and he feels that his love for Arthur, Guenever,
					and God are in conflict. These contradictory impulses force him
					to lie to his best friend, kill a man for rightfully accusing his
					mistress of adultery, and ignore the mother of his only son. Lancelot
					is so afraid of his own failure that he hides in his room instead
					of trying to heal the man who needs his help. He expresses confidence
					and power to the world even though he feels insecure and unworthy
					inside. Despite all of his sins and despite his inner lack of confidence,
					Lancelot is still able to perform a miracle and cure a man who is
					mortally wounded. But he can save only others and is so steeped
					in sin that he feels he can no longer save himself.

