A few days before the wedding, Simon visits Daphne at Bridgerton House and presents her with an engagement ring. The two joke around, happy to feel comfortable around each other again. The next night, Lady Bridgerton visits Daphne in her bedroom. Daphne knows her mother is going to tell her what happens between a husband and wife on their wedding night and feels relieved that she’ll finally learn what to expect. Lady Bridgerton struggles to get the words out and only divulges vague details, like the fact that Daphne and Simon will sleep together in the same bed and that the “marital act” doesn’t have to be unpleasant for Daphne. Daphne feels frustrated that she knows no more than she did before her mother’s talk. Lady Bridgerton then tells Daphne that Simon will know what to do, and also says that Daphne and Simon will need to be intimate several times in order for Daphne to get pregnant. Daphne is shocked to learn that the marital act is what leads to pregnancy, and she wonders if Simon is even capable of consummating the marriage if he isn’t capable of having children.

After the wedding, Simon and Daphne depart Bridgerton House to go to Simon’s ancestral home, Clyvedon. Daphne is surprised to learn that Simon did not plan on stopping on the way to Clyvedon, but Simon says that they can stop at an inn and stay the night there. When they arrive at the inn, Simon is angry to find that there is only one room available, which means that he and Daphne will have to share a bed. Daphne is confused about Simon’s anger, and once in the room, she admits that she’s nervous about their wedding night. Simon tells her that he would prefer to wait until they are at Clyvedon to consummate their marriage. Daphne begins crying and apologizes to Simon for being insensitive, saying that she should have known he wouldn’t be able to consummate the marriage. When Simon asks her what gave her that impression, Daphne explains what her mother told her. Daphne voices her assumption that because Simon can’t have children, he must not be able to perform the marital act. Simon realizes how little Daphne knows about sex and assures her that he is, in fact, able to consummate their marriage.

Love possesses a transformative power, but in the case of Daphne and Simon, it transforms them from effortless friends to an uneasy couple. Ironically, while they were a fake couple, Simon’s presence did not make Daphne nervous; they shared an easy comfort, even as they acted out their false courtship and struggled to keep their feelings under control. As Daphne waits for Simon in the sitting room, however, clenching her hands so tightly her fingernails leave red marks in her palms, she reveals a certain tension. Simon’s sigh of relief when Daphne likes the ring he chose for her betrays his nervousness as well. Their conversation is awkward, halting, a stark contrast to the ease with which they used to converse. In agreeing to marry, they’ve raised the stakes and undergone sacrifices. Simon sacrifices the vow he made to himself never to marry, while Daphne sacrifices her dream of having a large family.

In these chapters, propriety and lack of communication lead to misunderstandings. As a proper young lady, Daphne possesses no knowledge as to what happens between a couple on their wedding night. Her mother tries to explain what her daughter can expect, but Violet’s nerves reveal that sex is a difficult subject for a woman to discuss in this time period, and her inability to provide concrete details leaves Daphne confused. Violet’s vague connection between marital duties and having babies leads Daphne to erroneously conclude that Simon is unable to consummate their marriage. Another misunderstanding arises when Simon delays their wedding night, causing Daphne to feel even more confused and anxious. When Simon explains that the delay is motivated by his respect for her, Daphne’s apology reveals her belief that Simon is impotent. Simon then realizes Daphne’s confusion is a result of naïveté and innocence, which allows him to relax into the role of teacher. Ultimately, at the basis of these various misunderstandings is society’s unwillingness to educate women on matters that concern them.

