Though Gawain and Guinevere share the high table at the
				New Year’s celebration in Arthur’s court, he describes himself as
				the least of Arthur’s knights in terms of both physical prowess
				and mental ability. His modest claim to inferiority and his high
				status at court—he is Arthur’s nephew and one of Camelot’s most
				famous knights—testify to both his humility and his ambition. Gawain
				seeks to improve his inner self throughout the poem. After Gawain
				arrives at Bertilak’s castle in Part 2, it
				is evident that his reputation is quite widespread. To Gawain, his
				public reputation is as important as his own opinion of himself,
				and he therefore insists on wearing the green girdle as a sign of
				shame at the story’s end. He believes that sins should be as visible
				as virtues.

	Even though the Green Knight essentially tricks Gawain
				by not telling him about his supernatural abilities before asking
				Gawain to agree to his terms, Gawain refuses to back out of their
				deal. He stands by his commitments absolutely, even when it means
				jeopardizing his own life. The poem frequently reiterates Gawain’s
				deep fears and anxieties, but Gawain’s desire to maintain his personal integrity
				at all costs enables him to conquer his fears in his quest for the
				Green Knight.

	Gawain is a paragon of virtue in Parts 1 and 2 of
				the poem. But in Part 3 he conceals from
				his host the magical green girdle that the host’s wife gives him,
				revealing that, despite his bravery, Gawain values his own life
				more than his honesty. Ultimately, however, Gawain confesses his
				sin to the knight and begs to be pardoned; thereafter, he voluntarily
				wears the girdle as a symbol of his sin. Because Gawain repents
				of his sin in such an honorable manner, his one indiscretion in
				the poem actually ends up being an example of his basic goodness.

	Gawain is not a static character. In his encounter with
				the Green Knight, he recognizes the problematic nature of courtly
				ideals. When he returns to Arthur’s court at Camelot, the other
				lords and ladies still look to him like lighthearted children, but
				Gawain is weighed down by a new somberness. Though he survives his
				quest, Gawain emerges at the end of the poem as a humbled man who
				realizes his own faults and has to live with the fact that he will
				never live up to his own high standards.

