Bloom walks a roundabout route toward the downtown post
					office, thinking about the people he passes and about the funeral
					he will attend at 11:00 A.M. While reading
					packet labels in the window of the Belfast and Oriental Tea Company,
					Bloom takes out the postal card for his pseudo-nym, Henry Flower.
					Inspired by the tea labels, Bloom imagines the heady atmosphere
					of the East. He surreptitiously walks into the post office and picks
					up a typed letter addressed to his pseudonym.

	Outside the post office, Bloom opens his letter, but
					before he can read it, he is accosted by McCoy. Bloom makes small
					talk with McCoy while he tries to determine what is pinned to the
					letter, now in his pocket. While Bloom watches a sexy, upper-class
					woman across the street, McCoy makes small talk about Paddy Dignam’s death,
					which he heard about from Bantam Lyons. Bloom anticipates seeing
					the woman’s leg as she steps into her cab, but a tram blocks his
					view. Still chatting with McCoy, Bloom opens his newspaper and reads
					an ad: “What is a home without / Plumtree’s Potted Meat?
						/ Incomplete. / With it an abode of bliss.” McCoy and Bloom
					speak about Molly’s upcoming concert tour (McCoy’s wife is an aspiring singer).
					Bloom thinks of Boylan’s letter this morning and skirts the topic
					of Boylan’s management of Molly’s tour. Taking leave of Bloom, McCoy
					asks him to put McCoy’s name down in the Dignam’s funeral register.
					As McCoy leaves, Bloom thinks of the inferior singing ability of
					McCoy’s wife. 

	Bloom sees an advertisement for the play Leah. Bloom
					remembers the story line, which involves the blind, dying Abraham
					recognizing the voice of his long-lost son, Nathan. This reminds
					Bloom of his own father’s death. Bloom finally pulls out his letter—it
					has a flower inside. The letter is from his erotic penpal, Martha
					Clifford. In it, she asks to meet her correspondent in person, calls
					him “naughty” for using a certain word in his last letter, and,
					finally, asks him what kind of perfume his wife uses. Bloom puts
					the letter back in his pocket. He will never agree to meet her,
					but he will push further with the wording of his next letter. Bloom
					pulls the flower pin out of the enclosed flower and contemplates
					the many pins of women’s clothes. A song comes to mind: “O, Mairy
					lost the pin of her drawers. . . .” He thinks of the names Martha
					and Mary, and of a painting of the biblical Martha and Mary.

	Under a railway arch, Bloom tears up the envelope from
					Martha. Bloom steps into the backdoor of a church, reads the missionary notice,
					and ponders tactics for bringing religion to natives. Inside the
					church, a ceremony is in progress. Bloom considers that churches
					provide opportunities for sitting close to attractive women. He
					thinks of the power of Latin to stupefy. Sitting down in a pew,
					Bloom ponders the communal feeling that must come from taking communion. 

	He thinks about Martha acting indignantly respectable
					one minute about his diction, but asking to meet with him (a married man)
					the next minute. This discrepancy reminds Bloom of the turncoat
					Carey, who had a respectable, religious life, but was also involved
					with the “Invincibles” who committed the Phoenix Park murders. Bloom
					watches the priest rinse out the wine chalice and wonders why they
					do not use Guinness or another beverage. Looking at the choir loft,
					Bloom thinks of Molly’s performance of the Stabat Mater. As
					the priest finishes the ceremony, Bloom admires the effectiveness
					of the institution of confession and the idea of reform. The mass
					ended, Bloom gets up to leave before donations are requested. Bloom
					checks the time and heads toward Sweny’s to order Molly’s lotion,
					though he has left the recipe (along with his key) at home in his
					regular trousers. 

	At the chemist’s, Bloom thinks of alchemy and sedatives.
					While the chemist searches for the lotion recipe, Bloom thinks of
					Molly’s lovely skin and wonders if he has time for a bath. Bloom
					takes a lemon soap from the chemist and plans to return later to
					pick up the lotion and pay for both. As he leaves the shop, Bloom
					runs into Bantam Lyons. Lyons asks to see Bloom’s newspaper so he
					can check on a horse race. Bloom tells Lyons he can keep the paper
					since Bloom was only going to throw it away. Lyons, mistaking Bloom’s
					statement for a tip on a racehorse, hands the paper back to Bloom, thanks
					him and rushes off. Bloom thinks disgustedly about betting fever
					and begins to walk toward the public baths. He critiques an ineffective
					advertisement for college sports. He greets Hornblower, the porter,
					and thinks ahead to the moment when his body will be naked and reclined
					in a tub, his penis limp and floating like a flower.

Episode Five, “The Lotus Eaters,” is the first episode
					in which the thematic parallel to Homer begins to dominate the text.
					In The Odyssey, Odysseus’s men eat the flower of
					the Lotus Eaters and become drowsily complacent, forgetting about
					their quest to return home. In Episode Five, it is mid-morning and
					Bloom’s thoughts are lazy as he digests his breakfast and kills
					time before Paddy Dignam’s funeral at 11:00.
					Bloom’s attention wanders, yet the motif tying together many of
					his sentiments and observations is intoxication or drugged escapism.
					We are prepared for the motif from the opening page of the episode—Bloom
					imagines the Far East as a lazily intoxicating place. This motif
					then extends to other scenarios: Bloom notices the stupefied, effete
					horses drawing a tram; he thinks of the calming narcotic effect
					of smoking. Bloom spends a large section of the episode considering
					the stupefying power of religious ceremony—he assumes that religious
					missionaries have to compete with a lazy, narcotic lifestyle to
					win over a native population, and he appreciates the stupefying
					effect of Latin. The motif of intoxicated escapism sets the appropriate
					mood for an episode in which not much happens, and Bloom is largely
					alone. The motif also points to Bloom’s efforts to escape his own
					thoughts about Molly’s impending infidelity.

	Indeed, the motif of lazy intoxication leads to a set
					of related motifs, most of which point implicitly back to Molly.
					Bloom associates exotic narcotics with the East, and his imaginations
					of the East, in turn, relate to Molly. We learned in Episode Four
					that Molly grew up in Gibraltar, where her father, Major Tweedy,
					was stationed. In Bloom’s mind, Molly’s childhood in Gibraltar links
					up with thoughts about Turkey and the Crimean War, with thoughts
					about model farms and land schemes in Palestine, and, here in Episode Five,
					with imaginings of the lands and people even farther east in Ceylon
					or China. Because Bloom’s varied mental pictures of the East connect
					with his sense of Molly’s exoticism and eroticism, Molly remains
					present even in an episode devoted to Bloom’s erotic correspondence
					with another woman—Martha Clifford.

	Bloom’s covert correspondence with Martha Clifford offers
					us another perspective on the Blooms’ marriage. Instead of Molly being
					the adulterous one and Bloom the adoring husband, we begin to consider
					Bloom’s own part in the lapse of their relations. Yet Bloom seems
					more temporarily amused by Martha’s letter (spelling errors and
					all) than committed to having an affair with her. Our new perspective
					of Bloom in this episode also offers us glimpses of his more perverse
					tendencies: a desire to be punished, a fetish for women’s underclothing,
					his fantasies about meeting a woman during or after church. 

The scenario of the Martha-Bloom correspondence offers another
					motif related to the drugged escapism of the Lotus flower eaters—the
					motif of flowers themselves. Bloom chooses the pseudonym “Henry
					Flower” (a kind of synonym for “Bloom”). Martha encloses a yellow
					flower in her letter to Bloom. Yet even this motif leads back to
					Molly. Martha’s flower has no scent, and the final question of her
					letter is about his wife’s perfume. Accordingly, Bloom’s imagination
					of a tryst with Martha segues through a dream of two biblical doting
					women, Mary and Martha, thus leading back to Molly, whose Christian
					name is Marion (Mary).

