Sharifa is the high-class prostitute who finds Firdaus sitting by the Nile
				after her escape from Bayoumi’s house. Sharifa takes Firdaus to her luxurious
				home, and it occurs to Firdaus for the first time that she could one day have a
				home of her own and be surrounded by nice things. Sharifa, through her
				confidence and the skillful application of makeup, helps Firdaus see that she
				has beauty and strength. Unfortunately, Sharifa shows her these things in order
				to make her more appealing to the men to whom Sharifa hopes to sell Firdaus’s
				body. Though she takes Firdaus under her wing in order to earn more money,
				Sharifa does act as a mother figure to Firdaus, and it is under Sharifa’s care
				that it first occurs to Firdaus that she might be able to live without the
				protection of a man. Like Firdaus’s own mother, Sharifa both supports and
				undermines Firdaus. Under Sharifa, Firdaus is reborn as an attractive woman
				aware of the power that she has over men. But like Firdaus’s mother, Sharifa is
				jealous of the attention men give to Firdaus, and seeks to control her.

Eventually, Firdaus realizes that she has to leave Sharifa. This
				realization comes because she needs to make her own money and determine the
				course of her own destiny. In addition, Sharifa’s imagination is constrained by
				a patriarchal society in a way in which Firdaus’s is not. Sharifa only wants
				money and a comfortable life, and is willing to play the game that powerful men
				have set up in order to attain these things. Sharifa is more charming with the
				men who come to visit, and more eager to please. This is because she still
				believes herself to be, in some respect, a supplicant, lucky to get whatever
				money men throw her way. Firdaus wants to be comfortable, but she also wants
				power of her own. Firdaus begins by emulating Sharifa, but it is only after
				Firdaus leaves Sharifa that she realizes that as a prostitute, she commands
				power over men, not the other way around.

