Geralt of Rivia

A witcher and the protagonist of the novel. Geralt has completely white hair and other mutations. Originally from Rivia, Geralt travels from place to place to kill monsters and lift curses that have transformed people into frightening creatures. Geralt carries two swords and wears a medallion depicting a wolf. He is remarkably observant and cunning.   

Read an in-depth analysis of Geralt

Nenneke 

The high priestess of the temple of Melitele and Geralt’s friend. Nenneke is sharp-tongued and confident. She is an expert at healing and herbalism, and the rules of Melitele’s temple. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Nenneke 

Dandelion 

A troubadour and Geralt’s friend. Exuberant and outgoing, Dandelion has a reputation as a skilled musician and an expert in many fields. He is promiscuous, flirtatious, and prone to debauchery. Dandelion often dresses extravagantly and has an exaggerated manner. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Dandelion

Yennefer  

A sorceress and Geralt’s love interest. Yennefer is strong-willed, hungry for power, and intelligent. She is described as having violet eyes and black hair. She is a very skilled user of magic and surprises Geralt with the strength of her spells.  

Read an in-depth analysis of Yennefer

Iola 

A priestess at the temple of Melitele. She has blue eyes, freckles, and reddish hair. She is able to prophesize the future and has taken a vow of silence. 

Tailles  

A Knight of The White Rose Order. Tailles is hostile and quick-tempered. He is a favorite of Hereward and is incredibly loyal to him.  

Falwick 

The Count of Moën and Knight of The White Rose Order. Falwick has a deep hatred for Geralt.  

Dennis Cranmer 

Captain of Hereward’s guard. He is a dwarf with gray eyes and light hair. He follows orders precisely as they are given.  

Hereward 

A powerful noble who rules Ellander.  

Foltest 

The King of Temeria, Pontar, and Manakam. He lives in Wyzim. He had an incestuous relationship with his sister, and their daughter was cursed and transformed into a striga. He is slim and has a pretty face. 

Ostrit 

A magnate and a member of King Foltest’s court. He dresses richly. He is cautious and devious, and loved King Foltest’s sister.  

Nivellen 

A former robber cursed to look like a monster. In his monstrous form, he has a bear-like appearance with crooked fangs, claws, and fur. In his human form, he is pale and handsome. Nivellen has come to like his monstrous form, though he is guilty over the violence he committed that caused his curse. He is in love with Vereena.  

Vereena 

A vampire and Nivellen’s lover. She is pale with black eyes and hair. She can transform into an enormous bat and hunts people in the region around Nivellen’s estate.  

Stregobor  

A wizard and acquaintance of Geralt. He is tall and thin with bushy eyebrows and a crooked nose. He is calculating and cruel and participated in a program to kill and study mutated girls. He is a talented illusionist and he ardently believes in prophecy.  

Renfri 

The former princess of Creyden and the leader of a gang of mercenaries. She’s tall with short blond hair. Renfri, who is sometimes called Shrike, is a skilled fighter whose motivation is to take revenge on those who have wronged her.  

Caldemeyn 

An alderman in Blaviken and Geralt’s friend. He is outgoing and invested in the wellbeing of Blaviken, though misogynistic.  

Calanthe 

The queen of Cintra. She is savvy, powerful, and self-aware. Her smile conveys her personality and mood. She has curled ash-gray hair and is considered beautiful. She is committed to protecting Cintra and her daughter, Pavetta.  

Urcheon  

A former prince of Maecht cursed to look like an animal. As a monster, he has a muzzle, bulbous eyes, and fangs, while in his human form, he has a beard, wavy black hair, angular face, and a prominent nose. Brought up as a knight, he is eloquent and speaks of honor. He is in love with Pavetta and believes they are destined for one another.  

Pavetta 

The princess of Cintra. She is quiet and shy with waist-length ash-gray hair and emerald eyes. She is being courted by several powerful men but is in a secret relationship with Urcheon. She can tap directly into the Force.  

Torque 

A sylvan thought of as a devil by the people of Lower Posada. Torque is mischievous and headstrong, but good natured. He tries to help people where he can, providing the Filavandrel’s people with the resources to farm and protect Geralt and Dandelion from the elves.  

Lille 

The prophetess in Lower Posada. Mute and painfully thin when disguised as a peasant, she becomes radiant when she transforms into The Queen of the Fields. She is a goddess of living things worshipped by numerous peoples.  

Filavandrel  

The leader of the elves exiled from the valley. He has white hair and black eyes that burn with intensity. He thinks of humans as an infestation. He is proud and cold.  

Chireadan 

An elf in love with Yennefer. He is tall and has an expressive face. He is helpful to Geralt and Dandelion though his loyalty lies with Yennefer.  

Krepp 

A priest in Rinde. He is longwinded and knows a lot about magic and those who use it. He is quick to take offense and speaks out publicly against Yennefer because of her scandalous behavior.

