Vere symbolizes the conflict between the individual’s
				inner self and the role society forces the individual to play. Vere
				likes Billy and distrusts Claggart, and he seems not to believe
				Claggart’s accusations against Billy. When Billy strikes Claggart,
				Vere feels sympathy toward Billy; he does not seem to believe that
				Billy has committed a terrible sin. However, Vere ignores his inner
				emotions, convenes a court to try Billy, and urges the jury to disregard
				their own feelings of compassion and punish Billy according to the
				letter of the law.

	As a man, Vere exonerates Billy, but as a ship’s captain,
				he finds himself duty-bound to punish him, allowing his role as
				a captain to supersede his inner conscience. He does this partly
				to avoid taking responsibility for Billy’s death, making him the
				parallel of Pontius Pilate in the novel’s Christian allegory. But
				he also sacrifices Billy because he believes in the ultimate supremacy
				of society’s laws over the desires and impulses of individuals.
				With this belief, and in his actions throughout the later part of
				the novel, Vere demonstrates that he places greater faith in reason
				and rational philosophy than he does in the dictates of his own
				heart. Famous for his wide reading and his love of philosophy, Vere
				is in some ways too cerebral to be a leader of men, and in his rigorous
				adherence to the rule of law he fails in his moral responsibility
				to Billy.

	We are likely to feel that Vere is wrong in applying
				the letter of the law rather than following his heart, and one of
				the basic questions that this novel poses is why Vere is wrong to
				do this. One possible explanation may be that the rules governing
				the treatment of someone in Billy’s situation are predicated on
				mistrust and cynicism about human beings. In the eyes of the law,
				someone who strikes and kills his accuser, as Billy does, must be
				guilty of murder, and is probably guilty of the crime for which
				he was initially accused, as well. Billy’s individual circumstances
				are too unique and complex to be taken into consideration within
				the law. The novel remains ambiguous about which is paramount, the
				good of society or the good of the individual; still, it does make
				clear that Vere is racked with guilt after putting the law ahead
				of his conscience. Vere’s last words before he dies are a repetition
				of Billy’s name, suggesting that he is unable to let go of his sense
				of debt to Billy.

