Once Quintana is transferred from UCLA to the Rusk Institute
					at NYU, she will tell Didion that her memories of the preceding months
					are “mudgy.” Didion describes a similar “mudginess” as she attempts
					to reconstruct the weeks she spent with Quintana at UCLA. She has
					clear memories of attempting to delay Quintana’s tracheotomy. Didion
					later realizes that she resisted the procedure because it would
					mean that Quintana could not come home with her at a moment’s notice.
					Though the notion that Quintana’s condition would improve that rapidly
					is impossible, Didion holds onto the idea that they may leave the
					hospital and recuperate in Los Angeles or fly back to New York.
					Soon after Quintana gets the tracheotomy, they move her to a stepdown
					observational unit. Didion continues to pepper the doctors with
					questions and observations, which they meet with irritation and
					resistance, but she persists, since asking questions make her feel
					less helpless.

Through careful observation, Didion begins to understand
					the names of tests and procedures and begins to voice her concerns more
					clearly. But after learning that Quintana is again at risk for sepsis,
					just as she had been at Beth Israel, Didion spends time gazing out
					the window at the empty hotel swimming pool. She remembers a party
					she once held where she clogged the pool filter with gardenias,
					after attempting to float candles and flowers on the pool surface.
					Since the memory does not involve Quintana or John, the vortex effect
					seems to remain at bay. However, another memory from the same period
					triggers the vortex effect. The sudden death of a neighbor in Brentwood
					Park in 1987 had prompted John to suggest
					they spend more time in New York. Didion wonders if moving back
					to New York was the fatal decision; if she hadn’t agreed with John
					fifteen years ago, perhaps he would still be alive, and she would
					be able to drive to the house in Brentwood Park and find him there.
					Each memory seems to remind Didion of her choices and mistakes.
					Though she knows that the house in Brentwood Park had been torn
					down soon after they sold it, this line of thinking does not stop.

In late April, the doctors determine that Quintana can
					be transported to the Rusk Institute in New York but that she will
					have to be attended by trained personnel on an air ambulance. Watching
					the helicopters land at the hospital’s helipad, Didion recalls a
					day in 1970 when she and John saw a passenger
					in another car slump over and die while stopped at a red light.
					As with John’s death, an otherwise ordinary day was suddenly punctuated
					by an unexpected tragedy.

The day of the transfer arrives, and after a miscommunication about
					where the plane will depart from, they finally settle into the cramped
					plane and take off. During the flight, the paramedic takes pictures
					of Lake Mead, referring to it as the Grand Canyon. After correcting
					him initially, Didion remembers John’s criticism about her constant
					need to be right, thinking to herself that she in fact always thought
					that she was wrong. After the plane lands in a cornfield in Kansas
					to refuel, Didion stretches her legs and thinks about a passage
					concerning tornadoes from John’s yet-to-be published book, Nothing
						Lost. Recently, Didion had been reviewing the manuscript
					of John’s book when she noticed that one of the sentences didn’t
					sound right. She hadn’t been sure if the mistake was intentional
					and had become overwhelmed by the fact that she will have to make
					the final decision without consulting John. Once she lands in New
					York, she reviews earlier drafts of Nothing Lost and decides
					to leave the mistake in, remembering how John criticized her need
					to always be right and have the last word.

Although Didion doesn’t engage in the same kind of magical
					thinking as she did after John’s death, she still engages in a process
					of irrational thinking as she attempts to exert control over her
					daughter’s situation. At this stage in her grief process, the vortex
					effect and magical thinking work together. Her stubbornness about
					Quintana’s tracheotomy is a form of magical thinking, in which she
					clings to the idea that her daughter might suddenly get better at
					any moment. When she experiences the vortex effect while staring
					at the hotel pool, she at first seems to have some control over
					her memory, as she manages to call up a reminiscence that doesn’t
					involve John and Quintana. The pull of the vortex effect proves
					to be too strong, however, and she remembers the decision-making
					process that led to their relocation to New York. The vortex effect
					and magical thinking work together, creating the illusion that if
					they had never moved John would not have died and Quintana would
					not have fallen ill. Though she knows that she’s being completely
					illogical, Didion still clings to the notion that she can somehow
					go back into the past through her memories and make different choices
					as a way of averting the present circumstances.

Didion realizes that her need to be right is a manifestation
					of a need for control, and she starts to relax her need to have
					the final word. In doing so, she takes the initial steps toward
					letting go of magical thinking. Didion indicates that, during this
					tragic year, she never felt that she was right about anything, so
					any expression of confidence was actually a smokescreen for her
					lack of confidence. When Didion must make a decision regarding an
					apparent error in John’s manuscript, she must face the fact that
					she can never really know what John was thinking or feeling before
					he died, no matter how closely connected they may have been. Though
					their life together brought them to a point where their thoughts
					were often inextricable, Didion begins to understand how separate
					they truly were. She also accepts that, just as she cannot fully
					know or understand John’s thinking, she cannot fully understand
					how or why he died, and that she must accept the circumstances she
					has been given and work with the information available to her.

Didion’s willingness to cross social boundaries, particularly
					in the context of a hospital, shows the degree to which her need
					for control has disrupted her sense of accepted social behavior.
					On numerous occasions in the hospital she finds herself in a position where
					the doctors and hospital staff see her as intrusive. She makes no
					apologies for her behavior because, in many instances, she is correct
					about the proper course of action, but she finds herself slipping from
					being protective and somewhat overbearing to being completely irrational.
					While her staunch resistance to Quintana’s tracheotomy is honestly
					felt, she realizes later that she wasn’t concerned about potential
					health complications as much as she felt the need to hold onto the
					idea that her daughter might be able to leave the hospital at a
					moment’s notice. Didion finds that her natural impulse to take charge
					of the situation by learning as much as she can and aggressively
					asking questions has the expected consequence of bothering authority
					figures, but she also finds that the reasons behind her questions
					and demands originate in personal emotional needs and not genuinely
					logical concerns.

Didion continues the pattern of intellectual inquiry that
					she began shortly after John’s death, but her approach shifts. While
					she once was a reader engaging in a process of self-education, she
					is now a detective seeking clues that will produce a solution. When
					she previously conducted research, Didion sought out models and
					examples of grief experiences as a way of understanding her own emotions
					and reactions. Now, informed by an expanded understanding of her
					need for control, she assimilates information as a way to help her
					take action. Like a detective, she seeks out information about Quintana’s
					illness so she can challenge the choices made by the medical professionals
					at UCLA, believing that if she is properly informed she can prevent
					further mistakes and help bring about the desired solution—Quintana’s
					total recovery. She begins to apply this pattern of behavior to
					the problem of John’s death as well, as she works to figure out
					the origin of the medical problems that led to his death and, by
					understanding them, correct them and bring him back.

