Dostoevsky says that the Underground Man, though a fictional character,
is representative of certain people who “not only may but must exist
in our society, taking under consideration the circumstances under
which our society has generally been formed.” The Underground Man
is extremely alienated from the society in which he lives. He feels
himself to be much more intelligent and “conscious” than any of
the people he meets. However, he is aware that his consciousness
often manifests itself as a skepticism that prevents him from having
confidence in any of his actions. This skepticism cripples him and
keeps him from participating in “life” as other people do. The Underground
Man constantly analyzes and second-guesses every thought and feeling
he has. He is therefore incapable of making decisions about anything.

Feeling himself to be inferior to more active, less intelligent
people, the Underground Man goes through life full of shame and
self-loathing. This feeling of inadequacy before others is enhanced
by the fact that, as an orphan, he has never had normal, loving
relationships with other people. Having no real life experiences
upon which to base his hopes and expectations, he often relies on
the conventions of novels and drama. The contrast between his expectations for
life—which are based on literature—and the realities of the world
he lives in is often great, and this divide alienates the Underground
Man from society still further. The only emotional interactions
he can have with others involve anger, bitterness, revenge, and humiliation.
He can conceive of love only as the total domination of one person
over another. In order to feel that he has participated in life
in some way, he often instigates conflict with others and subjects himself
to profound humiliation. This humiliation actually gives the Underground
Man a sense of satisfaction and power, as he has brought about the
humiliation himself. As long as he can exercise his will, he does
not care if the outcome is positive or negative.

We meet the Underground Man when he is forty years old,
having retired from his civil service job and secluded himself in
a shabby apartment. By this point, he is a complete nihilist: he
has no desire to interact with others, and he has total contempt
for society and everyone who is part of it. In the second part of
the novel, however, the Underground Man describes himself as he
was sixteen years earlier, at the age of twenty-four. As a young
man, the Underground Man is already misanthropic, proud, self-effacing,
and bitter, but he also still clings to certain ideals. He is passionate
about literature, craves human attention, and wants others to respect
and admire him for his intelligence and passion. He is also occasionally
subject to fits of idealism. In the course of the second part of
the novel, however, we see how the Underground Man’s inability to
interact with other people causes his attempts to form relationships
and participate in life to end in disaster, and drives him deeper
underground.

