I would make his life more intelligible
to others than it was to himself. I would reclaim his disordered
days and cast them into a form that people could grasp, see, understand,
and accept.	

Richard joins a unit of black Communists. At the first
meeting, he describes his duties at the John Reed Club, provoking
giggles and condescending remarks from his comrades. Richard soon
learns that they are mocking his eloquence: his intelligent manner
of speaking and his ambition to become a writer have branded him
an “intellectual.” He also soon learns that the group disapproves
of the fact that he reads books not endorsed by the Party. Sadly,
Richard begins to understand that his comrades firmly believe that,
because Communists know the answers to all questions already, anyone who
exhibits curiosity should be viewed with suspicion. Richard concludes
that they are ignorant.

	Ross, a black Communist facing legal prosecution for
rioting, consents to a series of interviews for Richard’s biographical sketches.
Word of this activity spreads through the Party. A black comrade
visits Richard to warn him that intellectuals do not fit well with
the Communist Party, pointing out that the Soviet Union has had
to expel and even shoot many of them. Richard is dumbfounded and
protests that he is not an intellectual. He says that he sweeps streets
for a living, and, in fact, the relief system has just assigned him
this job. Richard’s visitor then suggests that a violent confrontation
with the police would bolster Richard’s credibility. Richard is dumbfounded.
He cannot understand why his ambition to write—to make black suffering
intelligible and meaningful through writing—is so controversial.

	Ed Green, another black Communist, interrupts a meeting between
Ross and Richard to ask if Richard has shown his notes to anyone
else. Later, Richard learns that Green has been representing Ross
in his indictment proceedings and that he wants to know if Richard
has written anything that could be used against his client in court.
Again, Richard is dumbfounded at this suspicion. Afterward, Ross
becomes cagey and uneasy around Richard. Richard grows increasingly
frustrated, as his black comrades suspect his every move. To make
matters worse, his white comrades idealize blacks to such a degree
that they cannot understand Richard’s struggles with black Party
members. He begins to feel an emotional isolation unlike anything
he felt in the South.

	Ross grows so hesitant that Richard abandons his idea
of biographical sketches altogether. Instead, he decides to write
a series of short stories based on the details he knows of his black
comrades’ lives. Suddenly, the Party charges Ross with “antileadership
tendencies,” “class collaborationist attitudes,” and “ideological
factionalism.” A group of black comrades visit to inform Richard
of the Party’s decision that Richard must stay away from Ross. Richard tells
them that he has done nothing wrong and that he feels unable to comply
with the decision. They leave him, wearing cryptic smiles.

	Richard finds some respite from his political anxieties
by working with wild, restless boys at the South Side Boys’ Club.
His attempts to write short stories, however, prove frustrating.
The John Reed Club organizes a conference to debate the role of
writers in the Party. Richard finds the decisions aimed against
writers stiff and unrealistic, but his Club comrades urge him to
hitchhike to New York City to attend a similar conference. The white
comrades there have trouble finding someone willing to house a black
comrade, and Richard becomes disgusted. He looks for a hotel in
Harlem, but finds only hotels for whites, making him even more disgusted.
These troubles seem to him much more pressing than any questions
about the left-wing literary movement, so he has trouble focusing
on the conference. Over Richard’s vehement objections, the conference moves
to dissolve the John Reed Clubs due to their subversive nature as
literary societies. When the final vote is taken, Richard casts
the sole dissenting vote.

	Richard stops attending meetings, as his duties have
been eliminated along with the John Reed Clubs. He learns that a
slew of lavish accusations have been leveled against him, and he
prepares to quit the Party. However, Buddy Nealson, a high-ranking
black comrade, calls Richard to a private meeting and convinces
him to start organizing a committee against the high cost of living.
Richard reluctantly accepts, even though he knows nothing about
the topic and it restricts his time for writing. When the Party
insists that he drop his writing completely and go to Switzerland
to meet with a youth delegation, Richard asks that his membership
be dropped. His request is mysteriously deferred. As Richard’s comrades
continue to slander him, Richard realizes that they are trying to
keep him in the Party so as to assassinate his character and expel
him themselves.

