Bloom steps into a carriage after Martin Cunningham, Jack
					Power, and Simon Dedalus—they are going to Dignam’s funeral. As
					the carriage begins to move, Bloom points out Stephen on the street.
					Simon disapprovingly asks if Mulligan is with him. Bloom thinks
					Simon is too vehement, but reasons that Simon is right to look out
					for Stephen, as Bloom would have for Rudy, if he had lived.

	Cunningham starts to describe his night at the pub and
					then asks Dedalus if he has read Dan Dawson’s speech in this morning’s
					paper. Bloom moves to take out the paper for Dedalus, but Dedalus
					signals that it would be inappropriate to read it now. Bloom skims
					the obituaries and checks that he still has Martha’s letter. Bloom’s
					thoughts soon wander to Boylan and his upcoming afternoon visit.
					At this moment, the carriage passes Boylan in the street, and the
					other men salute him from the carriage. Bloom is flustered by the
					coincidence. He does not understand what Molly and the others see
					in Boylan. Power asks Bloom about Molly’s concert, referring to
					her as Madame, which makes Bloom uncomfortable.

	The carriage passes Reuben J. Dodd, a moneylender, and
					the men curse him. Cunningham remarks that they have all owed money
					to Dodd—except Bloom, his look implies. Bloom begins to tell a humorous
					story about how Dodd’s son almost drowned, but Cunningham rudely
					takes over. The men soon check their laughter and reminisce sadly
					about Dignam. Bloom remarks that he died the best way, quickly and
					painlessly, but the other men disagree silently—Catholics fear a
					sudden death because one has no chance to repent. Power pronounces
					that the worst death is a suicide and Dedalus agrees. Cunningham,
					knowing that Bloom’s father committed suicide, argues for a charitable
					attitude toward it. Bloom is appreciative of Cunningham’s sympathy.

	The carriage stops for a cattle crossing. Bloom wonders
					aloud why there is no tramline for the cattle and Cunningham agrees. Bloom
					also suggests funeral trams, but the others agree only reluctantly.
					Cunningham reasons that a tram would prevent hearse accidents, such
					as the one recently that ended with a coffin dumped onto the road.
					Bloom envisions Dignam spilling out of his coffin. The carriage
					passes a water canal that runs to Mullingar, where Milly lives, and
					Bloom considers visiting her. Meanwhile, Power points out the house
					where the Childs fratricide, a well-known murder, took place.

	The carriage arrives and the men get out. Trailing behind,
					Cunningham fills Power in about Bloom’s father’s suicide. Bloom
					asks Tom Kernan if Dignam was insured. Ned Lambert reports that
					Cunningham is taking up a collection for the Dignam children. Bloom looks
					on one of Dignam’s sons with pity. They enter the church and kneel—Bloom
					last. Bloom watches the unfamiliar ceremony and thinks about the
					repetitiveness of a priest’s job. The ceremony ends and the coffin
					is carried outside. 

	As the procession passes May Dedalus’s grave, Dedalus
					begins crying. Bloom thinks about the realities of death—specifically,
					the failure of body organs. Corny Kelleher, the undertaker, joins
					them. Ahead, John Henry Menton asks who Bloom is. Lambert explains that
					he is Molly’s husband. Menton fondly recalls dancing with Molly
					once, and he harshly wonders why Molly married Bloom. 

	The cemetery caretaker, John O’Connell, approaches the
					men and tells a good-natured joke. Bloom wonders what it would be
					like to be O’Connell’s wife—would the graveyard be distracting?
					He admires the neatness of O’Connell’s cemetery, but he thinks it
					would more efficient to bury bodies vertically. He thinks about
					the fertilizing power of dead bodies and imagines a system by which
					people would donate their bodies to fertilize gardens. Thinking
					of O’Connell’s jokes, Bloom recalls the joking grave diggers in Hamlet. However,
					Bloom thinks, one should not joke about the dead during the two-year
					mourning period. In the background, O’Connell and Kelleher confer
					about tomorrow’s funerals. 

	The men assemble around the grave, and Bloom wonders
					who the man in the macintosh is—he is the unlucky thirteenth member
					of the party, and he was not in the chapel for the service. Bloom
					thinks of his own funeral plot with his mother and son in it already.
					He thinks of the horror of being buried alive and how telephones
					in coffins would prevent it. 

	The reporter, Hynes, asks Bloom for his full name. Bloom
					asks him to mention McCoy’s name, as well, as McCoy had requested
					in Episode Five. He asks Bloom for the name of the unfamiliar man
					in the macintosh, but Bloom does not know it. Bloom watches as the grave
					diggers finish. Bloom strolls through the cemetery, thinking that
					the money spent on luxurious graves could be given to charities for
					the living and that gravestones would be more interesting if they explained
					who the person was. He thinks of his upcoming visit to his father’s
					grave. He sees a rat and thinks of a rat eating a corpse. Bloom
					is happy to be leaving the cemetery, since he has been thinking
					about necrophilia, ghosts, hell, and how a graveyard visit makes one
					feel closer to death. He passes Menton on the way out and tells him
					his hat has a ding in it. Menton snubs him.

Much of Episode Six is concerned with Bloom’s relative
					isolation within a social group. Bloom is positioned as a latecomer,
					an outsider, and an anomaly in the cab with Dedalus, Cunningham,
					and Power; in the chapel service; and in the cemetery in relation
					to Menton and other attendees of Dignam’s funeral. Bloom’s exclusion
					is vaguely implicit: Bloom is invited to step in the cab last, and
					he is not referred to by his Christian name. He is not bantered
					with, and Hynes (to whom Bloom has lent money) admits to not knowing
					his Christian name. It is not clear how much Bloom recognizes his
					own exclusion. For example, the third-person narrator characterizes Cunningham
					as rude when he interrupts Bloom, yet Bloom himself thinks minutes
					later about Cunningham’s capacity for sympathy. Aside from the imperious
					John Henry Menton, the other men’s exclusion of Bloom does not take
					a vicious form—he is merely not as close to the men as they are
					to each other and is treated accordingly. 

The men’s attitude toward Bloom seems pointed only when
					it is implicitly connected to his Jewishness or to Molly. When the
					other men spot Reuben J. Dodd, their animosity for him as a moneylender merges
					with their anti-Semitism, and Bloom is implicitly excluded from
					their sentiments, both because of his Jewishness and because he
					has never had to borrow money. Bloom again feels vaguely attacked
					when Power, seeing Boylan, asks Bloom if he will be accompanying
					Molly and Boylan to the concert in Belfast and refers to Molly,
					less than respectfully, as Madame.


Bloom’s thoughts in Episode Six do not focus on this social
					exclusion. Instead, Episode Six parallels Episode Three’s thematic
					focus on fathers and sons. In Episode Three, we saw Stephen thinking
					for the first time about his father, Simon Dedalus, and about fathers
					in general, rather than solely about his dead mother. Here in Episode Six,
					we not only see Simon’s view of his son Stephen, but we also see Bloom’s
					thoughts move away from Molly and Milly to center on memories of
					his dead father and son and to thoughts about paternity generally.
					Here we learn explicitly that Bloom’s father committed suicide several
					years ago, and Bloom’s thoughts about him dovetail with thoughts
					about his son, Rudy, who died several days after birth. Bloom’s
					thoughts on paternity extend easily in this episode from the personal
					to the general—he views other fathers and sons, such as Simon Dedalus
					and Dignam’s young son, with an eye of understanding and sympathy.
					While Stephen, in Episode Three, seem to willfully isolate himself
					from his father, Bloom here suffers from his own father-son isolation—he
					has no means by which to continue his family line. Without a patriarchal
					history or future—the foundation of epics like The Odyssey—Bloom
					seems remarkably vulnerable in Episode Six.

	The true pathos of Episode Six is not reserved for the
					funeral service, during which Bloom’s thoughts seem humorously detached, giving
					us a defamiliarized version of the Catholic priest’s activities. It
					is in this sense that Ulysses strives to be a truly
					realistic novel. Instead of depicting Bloom at the funeral as a
					character who feels as one is supposed to feel—awed,
					sentimental, or quietly sad—Joyce purports to show Bloom as he would actually feel,
					in all its messiness, self-centeredness, and inappropriateness.
					The pathos of “Hades,” then, is reserved for unspectacular moments,
					or even repressed moments, such as Bloom’s quietly panicked reaction when
					the men see and salute Blazes Boylan in the street. Bloom’s reflexive
					and thorough study of his fingernails in response to Boylan’s appearance
					is a restrained and implicit representation of pathos that makes
					a stronger bid for our sympathy than, for example, Simon Dedalus’s
					scripted tearfulness near the grave of his wife, later in the episode.

