Robert Jordan and Anselmo scout out the bridge. Robert
					Jordan watches a sentry on the bridge through binoculars and notes
					that he has a “peasant face.” Fascist planes fly overhead, but Robert
					Jordan lets Anselmo think that they are Republican planes. The two
					men discuss war and religion. Anselmo likes to hunt but hates killing people,
					whereas Robert Jordan hates killing animals but is willing to kill
					people when required. They recall that gypsies and Native Americans
					both view bears as man’s brothers. Anselmo says that he misses believing
					in God. Robert Jordan silently resents his mission and thinks about
					Maria.

On the way back, Robert Jordan and Anselmo meet Agustín, another
					of Pablo’s band, who stands guard but has forgotten his half of
					the password. Agustín cautions Robert Jordan to watch his explosives.
					When they are alone again, Anselmo says that Agustín is trustworthy,
					but Pablo is “bad.” 

Back at camp, Robert Jordan brings his backpacks into
					the cave, where the atmosphere is tense. Pablo says that there is
					little wine left, so Robert Jordan drinks from his own flask of
					absinthe. Robert Jordan meets three more band members, Primitivo
					and the brothers Andrés and Eladio.

Pablo announces that he refuses to blow up the bridge.
					Robert Jordan replies that he and Anselmo will do it alone. Pilar
					announces that she supports the bridge operation because she supports
					the Republic. The men back Pilar, and she says that she is the real
					leader of the group. Pablo gives in sullenly. Robert Jordan shows
					the others his plans for the bridge. Looking at Pablo, Pilar is
					momentarily filled with sorrow and foreboding.

After dinner, Robert Jordan steps outside the cave into
					the night air. Inside, Rafael sings a song making fun of Catalans
					(members of a Spanish ethnic subgroup) but Pablo interrupts him.
					Rafael joins Robert Jordan outside and says that Robert Jordan should
					have killed Pablo during the confrontation earlier. Robert Jordan
					says that he considered it but did not want to risk alienating the
					other band members. 

Meanwhile, Pablo fondly confides in one of his horses.
					The narrator notes that the horse does not understand what Pablo
					says. 

Back inside the cave, Pilar says that Robert Jordan is
					too serious. He replies that he is anti-Fascist rather than Communist.
					Then, he seems uncomfortable discussing his father’s suicide. Maria
					admits that she is attracted to Robert Jordan, and he strokes her
					head. In private, he asks Pilar whether he should have killed Pablo.
					She assures him Pablo is no longer dangerous.

Robert Jordan sleeps in a robe outside the cave. Around
					one o’clock in the morning, Maria wakes him and slips in with him
					under the robe. He tries to kiss her, but she is nervous. She says
					she should not sleep with him if he does not love her. He says that
					he loves her, and she says that she loves him. Maria tells Robert
					Jordan that she was raped several times, but that Pilar told her
					that having sex with someone she loved would heal her memory of
					the rape. He shows her how to kiss, and they make love.


For Whom the Bell Tolls is preoccupied
					with signs and omens, and this section reveals several instances
					of foreshadowing that both heighten the drama and set the tone.
					Agustín’s warning to Robert Jordan to pay close attention to his
					packs explicitly increases the suspense and foreshadows Pablo’s
					later betrayal. In contrast, Pilar’s sense of sadness upon looking
					at Pablo after the men have sworn their allegiance to her establishes
					mood in a less specific manner. Both types of foreshadowing establish
					an atmosphere of foreboding for the future, and both make future
					events appear predictable and inevitable. In particular, Pilar’s
					sense of sadness is rooted in the idea that human nature does not
					change and the idea that history repeats itself. This sense of predictability
					and repetitiveness contributes to the grim, ominous mood that pervades
					the novel.

The poignant scene between Pablo and his horse sheds more
					light on the opposition between Robert Jordan’s sense of community
					and Pablo’s isolation. Misunderstood and lonely, Pablo complains
					to and seeks comfort from his horse, a creature that belongs to
					the natural world and remains untainted by the petty struggles of
					humans. As we might expect, and as the narrator subsequently reveals,
					the horse does not understand Pablo. The narrator drives home Pablo’s isolation
					with the revelation that the horse actually finds Pablo bothersome
					and wishes he would go away. Whereas Pablo fails in his attempt
					to communicate with his horse using words, Robert Jordan is successful
					in his nearly wordless communication with Maria. Robert Jordan eases
					the pain of Maria’s past sexual trauma, whereas the horse does nothing
					to ease Pablo’s emotional burden. 

Hemingway cleanly divides his moral world into characters
					who are “good,” such as Robert Jordan, Anselmo, Pilar, and Agustín; and
					those who are “bad,” such as Pablo. Because Hemingway reiterates
					these classifications many times through many different characters,
					we can rely on it to infer that “good” qualities include competence,
					steady nerves, honesty with oneself, and loyalty. On the other hand,
					“bad” qualities include fear, greed, pessimism, and self-delusion.
					Two characters—Rafael and Maria—notably escape this moral classification.
					Both Rafael, a full-blooded gypsy, and Maria, a young woman, belong
					to groups that Spanish society marginalized at the time. Rafael
					is repeatedly characterized as well-meaning but “worthless,” which
					puts his character in an ambiguous middle ground. Similarly, Maria
					comes across as a somewhat weak and flimsy character, in part because
					she is a naïve young woman. In this way, Hemingway’s seemingly rigid
					moral classifications exclude people who exist only on the margins
					of the world he portrays.

Robert Jordan, in particular, conforms to a character
					type that recurs throughout Hemingway’s novels—a character commonly referred
					to as the “code hero” because he follows the Hemingway moral code.
					The code hero’s most prominent characteristic is his ability to
					exhibit what Hemingway called “grace under pressure.” The code hero
					lives life for the present and takes his pleasure in the physical
					world of food, sex, and nature. He is a man of action rather than
					thought, and his greatest triumph is conquering his fear of death
					and nothingness (which some critics term nada after the Spanish
					word for “nothing”). Robert Jordan’s appreciation for nature and
					physical experiences—the smell of the pine trees, the taste of absinthe
					that evokes Paris, his coupling with Maria—indicates that he fits
					the code hero type, at least to some degree. For the time being, however,
					we see that Robert Jordan experiences many unresolved tensions that
					he tries to work through in his head. At this point, it is unclear
					whether he is a man of thought or action.

