“Oh! how stiff you are! Just go straight
						ahead as if you were walking . . . Dancing, don’t you see, is every
						bit as easy as thinking. . . .”

Harry runs into his landlady upon returning to his house
					the next morning. He feels unusually talkative, and they have a
					pleasant cup of tea together. Harry comments on ancient Indian philosophy, which
					he says understands the “unreality of time” that has now only been
					manifest by the device of the radio. Harry points out his disappointment
					that modern man uses the radio merely as one of his many distractions.
					He almost launches into a rant, but he holds back his bitterness
					and makes a joke instead.

	Harry waits impatiently for Tuesday, when he is to have
					dinner with the girl from the Black Eagle. He views his interactions
					with the girl as the only way he can change his life and avoid suicide.
					Tuesday finally comes, and during dinner, the girl’s intelligent
					manner switches between charming jovialness and utter seriousness.
					Her behavior fascinates Harry. When Harry asks her name, she points out
					that her face resembles a boy’s and asks him to guess. Because the
					girl reminds Harry of a childhood friend called Herman, he guesses,
					correctly, that her name is Hermine.

Hermine tells Harry that she is a kind of mirror for him,
					one that responds to his gaze with understanding. He does indeed
					see how looking at his “opposite” is like looking into a “magic
					mirror.” Hermine explains that Harry needs her—that he is “dying
					just for the lack of a push to throw [him] into the water and bring
					[him] to life again”—and that she is going to teach him how to dance,
					laugh, and live. She also tells Harry she will fulfill his needs,
					but in return she will make him fall in love with her and then make
					him obey a final command: to kill her. Harry accepts without protest.
					By the end of their talk, he feels that Hermine has seen through
					him entirely, and he tells her his secret about the Treatise.

	Harry and Hermine agree to start dance lessons, and she
					tells him to buy a gramophone and records. Even though Harry hesitates
					to immerse himself in the jazz music of the times, which he dislikes,
					he has agreed to obey all of Hermine’s commands. During their meetings,
					they discuss the Treatise and their daily thoughts. Each time they
					meet, Hermine displays surprising wisdom, but she always cuts short
					their conversations with some comment that highlights the uselessness
					of excessive thought. Once, for example, after a long talk about
					the inevitability of war, Hermine points out the value of living
					and seizing life, even if only for a short time. Later, she suggests
					that Harry’s lack of engagement with life is just as problematic as
					others’ lack of engagement with serious thought. Hermine, on the other
					hand, is able to enjoy even the smallest tasks of daily existence, such
					as choosing a gramophone or pulling meat off a duck bone.

	After two foxtrot lessons, Hermine takes Harry to a restaurant, which
					he sees as a world of unintelligent, unthinking pleasure-seekers.
					There, after a few dances together, Hermine encourages Harry to
					overcome his shyness and ask a pretty blonde to dance with him. He
					does so despite his belief that he is a stiff old man and his fear
					that he will be laughed at. The girl, who he later learns is called
					Maria, accepts. Maria’s own effortless grace makes Harry feel like
					this is the first time he has really danced.

At the dance, Harry also meets Pablo, a striking but taciturn young
					bandleader who Hermine claims “could play on all instruments and
					talk every language in the world.” Hermine is very much attached
					to Pablo. However, Harry is not much impressed as he watches Pablo
					play his two saxophones and attempts to communicate with the less-than-talkative
					young man. In the end, Harry dances again with Hermine, and he feels
					that she is his “double,” resembling not only himself but also Herman,
					his boyhood friend, “the enthusiast, the poet.” As they dance, Hermine
					explains that she suffers exactly the way Harry does in the disappointing,
					crude world.


Steppenwolf recounts Harry’s spiritual
					education and development, and in this section we begin to see Harry’s
					gradual process of change. His encounter with his landlady demonstrates
					how much he has learned from his night at the Black Eagle. Not only
					has Harry has become open to human intercourse, but he has also
					begun to appreciate humor. Instead of going off on a rant about
					the poverty of modern culture, he manages to make a joke instead.
					In doing so, Harry is acting on the lessons that his various mentors
					in the novel—Hermine and, in his dream, Goethe—have tried to teach
					him about the efficacy of laughter. Harry has also begun to reflect
					on the unreality of time. In Harry’s dream, Goethe says that seriousness
					is a result of placing too high a value on time. Later, Hermine
					points to the possibility of a kind of time outside the constraints
					of the temporal, lived-in world. Harry’s character develops as he
					begins to assimilate the new arguments and ideas to which he is
					exposed.

	Hermine is both Harry’s opposite and his double. Her
					name is a feminized version of Hermann Hesse’s and also sounds similar
					to Harry’s. Hermine’s remarks that she looks like a boy and that
					she is Harry’s mirror suggest that her character reflects Harry’s
					own. At the same time, Hermine’s interest in the sensual aspects
					of the world is quite different from Harry’s own obsession with
					morose, contemplative thought. Whereas he is a lonely intellectual
					and a reactionary against modern popular culture, she embraces everything
					about life, even its most mundane events. Hermine is well versed
					in the arts of living and the pleasures of the senses; over time,
					she teaches Harry the dance of life. Like a mirror image, Hermine
					seems intangible and almost nonexistent. The fact that she knows
					so much about Harry, devotes herself so completely to his improvement,
					and discusses so little of her personal history suggests that she
					might be an apparition conjured up by Harry’s mind to deal with
					his mental stress.

	The fact that Hermine teaches Harry to dance is significant,
					as Hesse’s writings frequently treat music as the most elevated,
					most divine engagement of humanity. The description of Harry’s experience
					at the symphony in the preface demonstrates how music can serve
					as a means of transportation into transcendence. Likewise, the image
					of Pablo playing effortlessly on his two saxophones echoes Harry’s
					earlier mention of the ability to flow untroubled between his wolf-half
					and man-half. Hermine thus decides to teach Harry how to make his
					own actions fit in time and tune with music. Dancing requires human
					interaction, furthering the suggestion that Hermine is Harry’s partner
					or double. Hesse is deeply concerned with the problem of a divided
					or splintered self, so the image of two people moving as though
					they were one resonates strongly with the novel’s philosophical
					concerns.

	Though Hesse was greatly influenced by the German Romantics, Steppenwolf does
					not follow the stylistic conventions of German Romanticism. Rather
					than setting his novel in a stylized world in which the supernatural
					and unnatural take place, Hesse draws the magical out of the everyday.
					He grounds his novel in the world of the mundane, the recognizable,
					and the common. As a result, Harry’s experience with Hermine is
					rife with worldly details: shopping for a gramophone, buying records,
					and learning the popular dance steps of the day. Hesse’s own writing
					echoes Harry’s experience: just as Harry allows popular music to
					infiltrate his jealously guarded intellectual lifestyle to come
					to a real engagement with life, Hesse writes on a mundane and contemporary
					plane to approach something more transcendent.

