The protagonist of the novel, Grant is the son of cane-cutters
				who labored on a Louisiana plantation. He grows up working in a menial
				job, but makes his escape and goes to college. He returns to his
				hometown a secular, educated man, distanced from his downtrodden
				black community. College has given him a more sophisticated perspective
				and an educated way of thinking and speaking. Yet despite the changes
				in Grant, white people still consider him inferior. Their shoddy
				treatment outrages Grant, but he says nothing and does nothing.
				He feels rage at the whites for treating him badly and rage at himself
				for taking the treatment lying down. This rage, bottled up in Grant,
				turns to bitterness, cynicism, and self-absorption. He feels he
				cannot help his community, and in order to stop this failure from
				paining him, he removes himself from the people he loves, looking
				on them with contempt and deciding that, since they are beyond hope,
				he cannot be blamed for failing to help them.

	Grant’s perspective changes over the course
				of the novel as a result of his visits to Jefferson and his interactions
				with Vivian, his aunt Tante Lou, and Reverend Ambrose. He learns
				to love something other than himself and to strive for change without retreating
				into his shell of cynicism. Still, Gaines does not suggest that
				because Grant’s attitude improves, he will be able to effect great
				change; he does not even suggest that Grant’s attitude improves
				entirely. Jefferson dies nobly, but he still dies, murdered by his
				racist oppressors. Grant ends the novel encouraged by the changes
				he has seen, but depressed at the barbarity of his society. He is
				still afraid, he is still withdrawn from some people, and he is
				still sarcastic and angry. Grant’s character development suggests
				that although great personal and societal improvement is possible,
				no quick fix will help a racist community, and for that reason Grant
				is justified in his despair.

