The novel’s first thirty letters are between Clarissa
					Harlowe and her best friend, Anna Howe, although some copies of
					letters to and from other characters are enclosed within these.
					A dramatic event has just occurred: Clarissa’s brother James has
					gotten into a fight with the notorious libertine Robert Lovelace,
					and he lies injured. Anna has heard rumors that the fight was over
					Clarissa, and she asks her friend to clear up the story. Clarissa
					explains that Lovelace visited the Harlowes as a suitor to her older
					sister, Arabella. Arabella admired Lovelace, but he showed a total
					lack of interest in her and appeared much more attracted to Clarissa.
					James Harlowe returns from Scotland and learns about the family’s
					new relationship with Lovelace. James is furious and threatens to
					disown Clarissa if she ever marries Lovelace.

To explain their history, Clarissa reveals that James
					and Lovelace had been at college together, where Lovelace had been
					popular, successful, and something of a bully. James’s pride and
					bad temper had caused a rift between the two, and Lovelace’s power
					over his classmates had given him the ability to ruin James’s school
					experience. Siding with James, the Harlowes (except Clarissa) began
					to treat Lovelace rudely. James challenges Lovelace, but, as a poor
					swordsman, loses the fight. Lovelace acts like a gentleman by allowing James
					to live, and by politely sending inquiries about his recovery, to which
					the Harlowes respond insultingly.

In the next few weeks the Harlowes become worried that
					Clarissa will marry the man who is now the family enemy. They forbid her
					to see Lovelace and propose a new suitor: a rich, ugly man named
					Roger Solmes. James and Arabella convince Mr. and Mrs. Harlowe to
					insist on Clarissa’s marrying this man, whom she hates. Clarissa
					is not allowed to write any letters or leave home until she agrees
					to marry Solmes. She arranges to carry on a secret correspondence
					with Anna, and Lovelace convinces Clarissa to also correspond with
					him by implying that if she does not, he may not be able to contain
					his anger at the Harlowe’s insults.

Anna writes that Clarissa’s brother and sister are solely
					motivated by jealousy. From childhood, Clarissa has been admired
					for her beauty as well as for her virtue and intelligence. When
					their grandfather died, he left his estate to Clarissa instead of
					to her older brother and sister. James and especially Arabella have
					always been in Clarissa’s shadow, and Lovelace’s defeat of James
					and rejection of Arabella have fueled their resentment.

Anna also suggests that Clarissa is in love with Lovelace.
					Clarissa is alarmed by this idea and insists that she “would not
					be in love with him, as it is called, for the world.”
					Anna mocks Clarissa for her denial, then relates new information
					she has learned about Lovelace. He is very wild, especially with
					regard to women. He lives for pleasure but is generous and financially
					responsible, as well an intelligent and accomplished man of very
					good family. He is noted for his love of and talent for writing
					(as is Clarissa).

The Harlowes continue to lobby Clarissa to marry Solmes.
					His money and his property, which adjoins theirs, will greatly advance the
					standing of the Harlowes, possibly enabling James to buy a title. Clarissa’s
					confrontations with her family become increasingly dramatic and
					she is ever more torn between familial duty and her dislike of Solmes.

Lovelace writes to Clarissa and expresses his anger that
					she is, by common report, about to marry Solmes. It is clear that
					Lovelace has a spy in the Harlowe house, because he knows about
					everything that has been happening there. He tells Clarissa that
					his family (which is a very noble one) admires her and supports
					the idea of their marriage. He asks if he can approach Clarissa’s
					father and uncles to make his proposal, and also if Clarissa will
					meet him privately one night in the garden. Clarissa feels she should
					stop writing to Lovelace, but the threat to her brother and the
					fact that she has few other bargaining chips convince her to continue.
					She eventually responds to one of Lovelace’s letters, forbidding
					him to visit her father and uncles and insisting that she wants
					to stay single.

The Harlowes refuse to let Clarissa go to church and dismiss
					her maid, Hannah, who has been helping with the secret correspondences.
					Arabella’s maid, the pert Betty Barnes, is assigned to watch over
					Clarissa.

Anna’s situation provides a contrast with Clarissa’s.
					She and her mother have a close but tempestuous relationship, and
					Anna has none of Clarissa’s scruples about familial piety. Mrs.
					Howe wants Anna to marry a respectable man named Hickman, whom Anna mocks
					mercilessly. Mrs. Howe is close friends with Clarissa’s Uncle Antony.
					Anna recommends that Clarissa take control of her grandfather’s
					estate, which Clarissa had put into her father’s power. Clarissa
					refuses, insisting that as a daughter her proper place is in her father’s
					house and under her father’s control.

Letter 31 is the first written
					by Lovelace. It is to John Belford, one of his wild pack of friends.
					Lovelace writes of his hatred for the Harlowes and his love for
					Clarissa, whom he calls “my angel” and “my charmer.” It is revealed
					that early in his life Lovelace had been jilted for a man of higher
					status and had vowed revenge on all women. Lovelace also mentions
					that he is somehow manipulating Clarissa’s uncle and, through him,
					Mrs. Howe to turn them against Clarissa so that she will have no
					choice but to seek protection from Lovelace.

What makes Clarissa difficult, as well
					as interesting, is that it takes a very long time to relate a very
					small number of actions. Although the first section covers three
					months and more than a hundred plus pages, hardly anything occurs
					that could be called an event. The only major plot point, the duel
					between James and Lovelace, has happened before the book begins.
					The event that provides the conflict for this section, Clarissa’s
					forced marriage, has not happened yet and may not happen. From this
					first section we can gather that reading the book for plot will
					likely be disappointing. The action mainly goes on in characters’
					minds and in their written and spoken conversations with one another.


 Clarissa’s letter (or epistolary) form
					lends itself to a psychological, rather than plot-driven, novel.
					As Richardson notes in the Preface, a novel in letters is bound
					to be longer than one written as a narrative, because the letters
					will include the characters’ thoughts about and speculations on
					the events that happen. Since the letters in Clarissa are
					written by four different characters, we are given multiple points
					of view on single events, which also contribute to the length of
					the work and relative lack of action. This storytelling device was
					an innovation for Richardson. While his first novel, Pamela,
					is also in the form of letters, almost all of the letters are written
					by Pamela. Clarissa is more ambitious: the different
					points of view make the novel richer and allow us to relate with
					more than one character.

The letter format, especially when it uses more than one
					narrator, leaves a lot up to the reader. Multiple voices add depth
					to Clarissa’s story, but they might also lead to
					confusion: how can we tell which characters are telling the truth?
					With no narrator to warn readers that the rakes’ behavior is immoral,
					and that their perspectives may not be trustworthy, each character
					and event is open to interpretation. As it happens, Richardson’s
					readers did not interpret the work as he would have wanted them
					to. He was upset that many readers admired Lovelace and even picked
					up some of his slangy expressions.

The first section of the book introduces most of the major
					characters, beginning with Clarissa Harlowe, who is described by
					the people who know her as exemplary. She is exceptionally beautiful, exceptionally
					intelligent, and devoted to virtue. She is a credit to the Harlowe
					family, but her superiority is also a threat to them. Clarissa’s
					brother and sister resent her for her good fortunes, as indicated
					by their reactions to Clarissa’s inheritance and to Lovelace’s courtship.
					The beautiful and virtuous Clarissa is out of place amongst the
					Harlowes, who demonstrate a variety of negative personality traits.
					Mr. Harlowe is characterized as domineering, Mrs. Harlowe is passive
					and fearful, Arabella is mean-spirited, and James is hotheaded and
					cruel.

As noted by Anna, the main vice and motivation of the
					family is avarice: their aggressive plans to marry Clarissa off
					to the wealthy Mr. Solmes reveal that wealth and status are of the
					utmost importance to them. The Harlowes are members of the English gentry, a class
					of people in the eighteenth century who were newly wealthy and did
					not have social status. There was a stigma attached to being from
					an up-and-coming family like the Harlowes. Mr. Solmes is one of
					this group as well: he has made a great deal of money but has not acquired
					the social graces of the aristocracy. The Harlowes, too, are wealthy, but
					not noble. As such, they are socially inferior
					to Lovelace, who will inherit a peerage when his uncle dies. To
					marry Clarissa would be a step down for Lovelace, but her individual exceptionality
					makes her an acceptable choice in the eyes of his family (at least
					according to Lovelace).

Clarissa and Anna’s correspondences highlight their very
					different dispositions and the ambiguities of Clarissa’s feelings
					for Lovelace. While she claims that Clarissa is too serious, Anna characterizes
					herself as too flippant, and she freely makes fun of her mother
					and her potential fiancé, Hickman. In contrast, Clarissa feels obliged
					to speak respectfully of her family even when they are mistreating
					her. Anna teases Clarissa about the “throbs” she might feel when
					she reads Lovelace’s letters, although Clarissa insists that she
					is simply treating him with ordinary respect, and that it’s her family’s
					hatred that has sparked her interest in him. The difference between
					their accounts of Clarissa’s feelings for Lovelace makes it unclear
					how much Clarissa’s desire, or unconscious desire, for Lovelace
					might motivate her actions. Once again, the letter form leaves us
					to decide who is telling the truth.

Although Clarissa does not approve of Lovelace, she finds
					him intriguing. In Clarissa and Anna’s letters, we learn that Lovelace
					is an inappropriate match in one important way: she is virtuous
					and he is wicked. In other ways, however, the two seem to make a
					nice couple. As Clarissa is superior to other women, Lovelace surpasses other
					men in looks, bravery, intelligence, and charm. A major contributing
					factor to Lovelace’s bad reputation is his mistreatment of women,
					which, according to him, is a result of an early rejection. However,
					it is clear that Lovelace thoroughly enjoys the game of seducing
					and abandoning women and is capable of weaving elaborate webs of
					deceit. Clarissa, however, is not an ordinary target of Lovelace’s
					game: he claims to be in love for the first time, yet he still relishes
					his ability to turn her family against her and drive her into his
					arms. A tension is created between Lovelace’s love of Clarissa and
					his love of intrigue and revenge.

Clarissa, meanwhile, is occupied with the knotty struggle between
					familial duty and her individual happiness. The tension that arises
					here is between the individual and the social organization. Clarissa
					seems to believe in both: she considers it unthinkable to accept
					unhappiness for the rest of her life, but she also believes that
					as a daughter she is, and ought to be, subjected to her father’s will.
					Clarissa’s conception of virtue is therefore rather complicated: while
					following rules is important, a person still has responsibility for
					his or her own happiness. She believes in obedience to one’s parents,
					as indicated by her willingness to hand over the inherited estate to
					her father. But she is also unwilling to obey her parents’ commands
					to marry a despicable man and compromise her personal freedom.

