As the summer comes to an end, Antonio spends his mornings
					walking with Ultima, gathering herbs and medicines from the llano.
					During this happy time, Antonio grows to love both the llano and
					the river. Ultima teaches him that plants have spirits like people
					and tells him stories about the old days. Antonio realizes that
					Ultima is happiest when she is out on the llano, and her happiness
					helps him to realize that he too is a part of the llano and a part
					of nature. Antonio tells Ultima that he will soon visit his mother’s
					brothers, and Ultima tells him that she is an old friend of his
					mother’s father. He asks her why his Luna relatives are so quiet,
					and she replies that it is in the Luna blood to be quiet like the
					moon, just as it is in the Márez blood to be loud and restless like
					the sea. (In Spanish, la luna means “moon” and el mar means “sea.”)
					Antonio feels the presence of the river and wonders again about
					Lupito’s soul.

	Back at home, Antonio and Ultima dry the plants on the
					chicken shed. María tells them over dinner that, as Antonio had
					expected, it will soon be time to visit the Lunas to help with the
					harvest, a yearly ritual that keeps Antonio close to his grandfather
					and uncles. Antonio spends the rest of the afternoon playing at
					Jáson’s house and then cuts wild alfalfa by the river to feed to
					the rabbits.

	Every night, Antonio’s family prays before María’s statue
					of the Virgin of Guadalupe, a beautiful, two-foot-tall likeness
					of the Virgin in a blue gown. Antonio loves her because she always
					forgives; the Virgin is his favorite saint. He knows that she is
					the patron saint of his land. On the foot of the statue a little
					paint has chipped away so that the white plaster is visible, and
					Antonio thinks of the plaster as the Virgin’s pure soul.

	That night, Antonio hears Ultima’s owl singing its mournful
					song outside his attic window. Antonio slips into sleep and has
					a dream in which the Virgin speaks to María. The Virgin promises
					María that his older brothers will return home from the war safely.
					When María asks her to make Antonio a priest, Antonio sees the Virgin wearing
					the clothing of mourning for him while standing on the moon. When
					he cries out in his sleep, Ultima comes to comfort him.

Because Anaya’s audience likely has had little previous
					experience with the culture he describes, Ultima is a mentor figure
					not only to Antonio, but also to us as readers as well. She relates
					both to Antonio and to the general reader cultural beliefs about
					the spirits of plants in nature and also historical information
					about Antonio’s indigenous ancestors and about the Spanish in Europe.
					Ultima’s guidance introduces Antonio to his cultural identity as
					a Chicano. The knowledge she conveys to him is particularly important
					not only because Antonio will be in school soon but also because
					of the changes his culture will face as it integrates with a modernized world.
					In particular, Ultima’s advice that Antonio does not need to choose
					between his parents’ conflicting wishes for him gives Antonio the
					resolve to move beyond his parents’ split views. Ultima’s lessons
					illustrate a deeper desire: she wants him to listen to the voices
					of the land and his heritage. She believes that this knowledge will
					help him build his future out of the pieces of his ancestral past.

	Although María’s devout Catholicism represents the Spanish
					elements in her cultural tradition, the form of Catholicism she
					practices is naturally a mixture of both Spanish and indigenous elements.
					The legend of the Virgin of Guadalupe is partly an allegory of the
					cultural and racial clash between Spanish colonists and indigenous
					peoples. When the Spanish came to the New World, they launched an
					intense campaign to convert indigenous people to Catholicism. The
					legend has it that the Virgin Mary appeared to a native man who
					was baptized with the Christian name Juan Diego. However, she appeared
					with the dark skin of the indigenous peoples of Mexico. She told
					Juan Diego that she wanted a church built on the hill of Tepeyac,
					the former location of an Aztec temple destroyed by the Spanish
					colonists.

	The Virgin is the embodiment of both the novel’s main
					forces of conflict and their inherent resolution; the Virgin both
					defines and heals the cultural struggle that preoccupies Antonio
					and his world, and she is thus a figure of extraordinary psychological
					importance in the book. Her story relates the original conflict
					between the indigenous peoples of Mexico and the Spanish colonists.
					Juan Diego, as a native man, had a great deal of difficulty getting
					an audience with the Spanish bishop. The bishop refused to believe
					Juan Diego’s story. When the Virgin appeared to Juan Diego for the
					fourth time, she instructed him to pick some roses to take to the
					bishop as proof for his story. Juan Diego obeyed her. When he opened
					his cloak to spill the roses out in front of the bishop, the image
					of the dark-skinned Virgin Mary was emblazoned on his cloak. Thus
					the bishop constructed a small church on the hill; it was later
					replaced with a larger, more elaborate church, the Basilica. The
					dark-skinned Virgin Mary became known as the Virgin of Guadalupe,
					sometimes referred to as the Queen of Mexico. Representations of
					her image contain deep reds and blues, prominent colors in Mexican
					indigenous artwork.

	Antonio’s relationship to the Virgin of Guadalupe highlights
					his growing moral awareness. Before, he was largely concerned with
					sin and punishment. In this chapter, he begins to include forgiveness
					as an element of moral dilemmas. He views the Virgin of Guadalupe
					as the sweet, forgiving mediator between sinners and a wrathful, unforgiving
					God. His dream about the Virgin of Guadalupe reveals that he has
					begun to consider the possibility that he too can sin. He dreams
					that she prays in mourning over him, implying that she is asking
					God’s forgiveness for him.

	The dream also reveals Antonio’s developing awareness
					of his own mortality. The dream has multiple meanings. It is possible
					that the Virgin is mourning his death. It is also possible that
					the dream means that becoming a priest does not save Antonio from
					sin as his mother wished. It could also mean that Antonio disappointed
					his mother’s wishes by not becoming a priest. The dream symbolizes many
					of the conflicts that plague Antonio as he grows out of his childhood
					ignorance and innocence. It represents his preoccupation with sin
					and punishment and the possible significance of disobeying his mother’s
					wishes for him. He is struggling to integrate his developing independence
					into a defined moral structure. The absence of a clear line between
					right and wrong in the dream illustrates Antonio’s struggle with
					moral ambiguity. He is afraid of the inevitability that he will
					increasingly be subject to moral judgment as he grows older. However,
					he does not have to be alone while he makes the journey into the
					adult world of moral decision-making. Ultima is there to comfort
					him when he awakes.

	On a subconscious level, Antonio relates to Ultima in
					the same way as he does to the Virgin. Throughout Bless
						Me, Ultima, Ultima is referred to as the mujer que no ha
					pecado, or “the woman who has not sinned.” Antonio also had a dream
					that Ultima’s owl flew the Virgin to heaven. His parents frequently
					inspire the fear of punishment and judgment, but Ultima does not.
					Antonio reveals thoughts and feelings to her that he is not comfortable
					revealing to his parents, and in this way, she is the living embodiment
					of understanding and forgiveness, just as the Virgin is the iconic
					embodiment of understanding and forgiveness.

