Melanie throws a surprise birthday party for Ashley, and
					Scarlett goes to the lumberyard to delay Ashley. Scarlett and Ashley
					talk wistfully about the old days before the war. Scarlett finally
					allows herself to look back on old memories and begins to understand
					that Ashley’s unhappiness stems from the loss of the Southern gentleman’s
					way of life. Her passion for Ashley feels dim now, replaced by a
					friendly, sympathetic love. Scarlett begins to cry and Ashley takes her
					in his arms to comfort her. Ashley stiffens, and Scarlett turns
					to see that Archie and India, Ashley’s sister, have been watching
					them.

	Archie tells Rhett about the scene. Scarlett, knowing
					the story will spread, dreads facing the party. Rhett berates her,
					calls her a coward, and forces her to go to the party. Scarlett
					realizes that she cares about no one’s judgment but Melanie’s. When
					Scarlett enters the party, everyone falls silent and turns to stare.
					Melanie emerges from the crowd, takes Scarlett’s hand, and asks
					Scarlett to receive the guests with her.

That night Scarlett paces frantically in her room, unable
					to abandon the memory of Melanie’s fierce faithfulness to her. She
					slips downstairs to find some brandy and encounters Rhett, who is
					drunk and angry. He tells Scarlett that he loves her and that he
					would kill her if he thought it could take Ashley from her mind.
					Suddenly Rhett seizes her in his arms and carries her upstairs,
					tearing her clothes off and kissing her roughly. After a wild night,
					Scarlett wakes with new passion for Rhett. She is nervous and excited
					to see Rhett again, but he has left and does not return for several
					days. He returns and nonchalantly tells her he has been at Belle’s.
					They exchange harsh words, and Rhett tells Scarlett that he is taking
					Bonnie on a long trip.

Melanie continues to support Scarlett faithfully and openly
					breaks with India’s camp. All of Atlanta’s prominent families choose
					sides, and the feud splits the town in two, ending Ashley’s relationship with
					India and Melanie’s relationship with Aunt Pittypat, in whose house
					India lives. Scarlett reflects that both she and Ashley must now
					hide behind Melanie’s protective strength.

Rhett stays away for three months, and Scarlett misses
					him terribly. She discovers that she got pregnant the night before
					Rhett left and for once the news of pregnancy makes her happy. Rhett
					mocks Scarlett upon returning. She angrily tells him of her pregnancy
					and he replies, “Cheer up, maybe you’ll have a miscarriage.” Enraged, Scarlett
					swings at him. Rhett steps out of the way, and Scarlett falls down
					a long staircase. As a result of her fall, she loses the baby and nearly
					dies. Melanie stays by her side. Rhett, frantic with guilt, weeps
					and tells Melanie that he loves Scarlett and fears that he has killed
					her with his crazed jealousy.

A month later, Scarlett goes to Tara to recuperate. Rhett
					tells Melanie he wants Ashley to buy the mills from Scarlett. He
					will anonymously give Ashley the money to make the purchase, and
					Melanie must encourage Ashley to buy the mills. Hopeful that if
					Ashley owns the mills Beau might attend Harvard and Scarlett might
					worry less, Melanie reluctantly agrees. Ashley buys the mills, and
					the four have a little party to celebrate. But Scarlett denounces
					Ashley’s plan to fire Johnnie Gallegher and send away the convicts.
					Ashley replies that ill-gotten money cannot make anyone happy. Scarlett
					protests, but when Rhett asks her sardonically whether her money
					has made her happy, she falls silent.

Scarlett begins to understand her love for Rhett as the
					novel draws to a close, and Rhett begins to understand his love
					for Scarlett more fully. Scarlett’s understanding begins with her
					encounter with Ashley in the lumberyard and consequent realization
					that she feels only warm friendship for him. Her meeting with him
					should feel imbued with all of the accumulated, pent-up passion
					of their years-long hidden love for one another, but instead it
					feels safe and sad. In Chapter LXII, she realizes she loves Rhett
					in a revelatory moment, as if finally waking up from a recurring
					nightmare. Scarlett’s feelings for Rhett begin to emerge and surprise
					her as she starts to understand her own hopes and dreams. At the
					same time, Rhett’s love for Scarlett cracks his sardonic, nonchalant
					mask. Rhett fully realizes his love for Scarlett only after he treats
					her horribly. His tumultuous, tightly contained passions break out
					of his control several times in this section. His jealousy is evident
					in his claim to Scarlett that he would kill her if it would make
					her stop thinking about Ashley. His emotions continue along this
					violent trajectory as he carries Scarlett up the stairs and brutally
					makes love to her. Rhett confesses all his feelings to Melanie only
					after insulting Scarlett deeply and causing her to fall down the
					stairs. The depths of his dark soul are not exposed until it rages
					and then repents.

	The sex scene in Chapter LIV presents difficulties for
					a reading of the novel that sees Gone with the Wind as
					a feminist work starring a feminist heroine. By modern standards,
					Rhett rapes Scarlett, or at least practices sadism on her without
					her consent. Mitchell writes that “he had humbled her, hurt her,
					used her brutally.” If Scarlett were a feminist character, she would
					be outraged at how Rhett dehumanizes her to satiate his own desires.
					But Scarlett is not a feminist character, and she reacts to this
					treatment with elation and “the ecstasy of surrender.” Her grateful
					reaction to Rhett’s sexual violence makes Scarlett seem more the
					wilting woman her society expects and less the strong and independent
					woman more typical of modern society. Scarlett, whom we usually
					see emotionally abusing men, now glories in being physically abused
					by a man. At worst, Mitchell presents rape as a manly last resort,
					good for winning a difficult woman’s respect and love. At best,
					she presents two characters who make a perfect match, Scarlett’s
					masochism and Rhett’s sadism adding up to a mutually satisfying
					sexual experience.

	Mitchell almost certainly intends Scarlett to be seen
					as a strong, progressive woman throughout the novel, and it seems
					unlikely that she would intentionally undercut our opinion of Scarlett’s
					strength in the last chapters. Even after submitting to his violent
					sexual advances, Scarlett continues to defy Rhett feistily. She
					tries to slap him when he insults her and her unborn child, for
					example. We may see Scarlett’s reaction to Rhett’s sexual attack
					as unsettling, but readers of Mitchell’s day might have found it
					empowering. Scarlett has the agency to enjoy sex in a time when
					women’s sexual pleasure was not discussed. Also, even in Mitchell’s
					time, sex was seen as an obligation in marriage, not a choice, and
					spousal abuse was not loudly condemned as it is today. Rhett’s behavior
					therefore does not absolutely transgress the boundaries of acceptable
					married behavior.

	As the novel draws toward its climactic moment, its consistent large-scale
					view of Southern society collapses into a tight focus on Scarlett,
					Rhett, Ashley, and Melanie. Although Gone with the Wind is
					a historical novel, near its end it becomes most importantly a powerful
					story about a group of memorable characters, and it puts aside history
					in favor of a close examination of personal relationships. 

