Naomi dreams of her mother doing a death dance with a
					rose in her mouth. The rose is connected to Obasan’s twine, which
					is connected to Aunt Emily’s package. A figure Naomi calls the Grand
					Inquisitor descends and begins opening her eyes and her mother’s
					mouth. Naomi wakes. She thinks that to understand her mother, the
					Grand Inquisitor has to listen to her silence. She thinks that the
					rose stands for her mother’s story. She decides to stop her inquisition,
					her search for the truth. Obasan wakes and begins reading the papers
					from Aunt Emily’s cardboard folder.

As Naomi does the dishes, Nakayama-sensei, Aunt Emily,
					and Stephen arrive. Naomi is surprised by the gray in her brother’s
					hair. He seems uncomfortable. Nakayama-sensei says a prayer over
					the tea and Uncle’s bread. Then he looks at the letters. Aunt Emily
					says she wanted to tell the children a long time ago. Nakayama-sensei reads
					the letters aloud. They are from Grandma Kato to Grandpa Kato.

Naomi mentions that in high school, she learned that her
					mother’s grave had been found. The first letter from Grandma Kato
					is brief. The second says that Grandma Kato and Naomi’s mother decided keeping
					silent would help the horror abate, but it didn’t. Naomi’s mother
					specifically didn’t want her children to know what had happened.
					Grandma hoped by writing about the events to her husband, she would
					rid herself of some pain.

In 1945, Grandma and Naomi’s mother
					were in Nagasaki, helping Naomi’s cousin, Setsuko, with her new
					baby, Chieko, who looked just like Naomi. While they were there,
					many of their family members died in a bombing of Tokyo. One day,
					as Grandma was getting ready to make lunch, with Chieko strapped
					to her back, the bomb hit. Grandma was knocked unconscious. She
					awoke to find a scene of total devastation. The baby was unconscious,
					but alive. Both of Setsuko’s eyes had been blown out, and her skin
					came off against Grandma’s hand, but she was still alive and calling
					for her son, Tomio. Tomio survived unharmed. Everywhere there were
					people hideously maimed and dying. Grandma headed toward the house
					of Setsuko’s father-in-law. At a stream, exhausted, she fell asleep.
					When she woke, she and the baby were at the father-in-law’s house,
					but Tomio was gone. He was never found. One day, Grandma came across
					a bald woman who had lost her nose and a cheek. Maggots filled her
					wounds. This woman was Naomi’s mother.

Naomi’s mother recovered in a hospital. She insisted on
					wearing a mask after her bandages were off. At four years old, Chieko
					was dying of leukemia.

Nakayama-sensei says a prayer for forgiveness. Naomi asks
					her mother to help her listen.

Naomi speaks to her mother as if she were there, telling
					her she shares her horror. She says that Obasan and Uncle granted
					her mother’s request for silence. She says that silence destroyed
					them both.

Nakayama-sensei is still praying. Naomi says she feels
					her mother’s presence and love.

In the small hours of the morning, Obasan looks through
					a box of photographs. Although Obasan does not weep, Naomi knows
					she is grieving. She puts on Aunt Emily’s coat and drives to the
					coulee.

The novel ends with an excerpt from a 1946 memo
					written by the Co-operative Committee on Japanese Canadians, arguing against
					the deportation of Japanese Canadians.

In a novel largely concerned with the formation and retention
					of family bonds, Stephen and Naomi’s relationship is remarkable
					for its coolness. The siblings have lost nearly everyone close to
					them, including their mother and father, and we might expect them
					to cling to each other. Yet they see each other about once a decade,
					and their reunions are passionless events. When Stephen arrives
					at Obasan’s house, for instance, he doesn’t even greet Naomi. Their remote
					behavior toward each other may be a casualty of their family’s total
					failure to communicate. For various reasons, the grownups constantly
					hid information from Naomi and Stephen throughout their childhoods
					and well into their adulthoods. This habit of obfuscation seems
					to have been passed on to the siblings, who never once have a conversation
					of real import.

In these last chapters of the novel, Naomi is still struggling
					with the merits of silence versus the benefits of memory. Her nightmare about
					her mother helps her decide, at least for a time, that silence is best.
					The evil figure in the dream is the Inquisitor, who brutally opens
					Naomi’s eyes and her mother’s mouth. He is the villain, but he is
					also a stand-in for Naomi. For years, she has been metaphorically attempting
					to force open her mother’s mouth, to wrench the story of those lost
					years from her absent, and now dead, parent. Over the course of
					the novel, she has also been forcing her own eyes open, as the Inquisitor
					does in the nightmare, by making herself revisit scenes from her
					youth. If Naomi is like the Inquisitor, and the Inquisitor is a
					terrifying villain, it follows that Naomi’s quest to unearth the
					truth is ill-advised.

Yet while Naomi understands and forgives her mother’s
					desire to keep silent about the atrocities she saw and suffered,
					in the end she seems to feel that the silence was not worth the
					price. It is better to know all. Chapter 38,
					a lyrical outpouring of emotion addressed primarily to Naomi’s mother
					is characterized by Naomi’s longing to share her mother’s pain.
					In the end, Naomi insists she feels a mystical connection to her
					deceased mother, as if she is still present somehow. While this
					is a comforting sensation, its pathos is a strong argument for truth
					telling. Naomi must talk herself into feeling her mother’s presence,
					because she has almost nothing else to go on. Hard facts, even the
					most disturbing hard facts, are precious to her. She clings to photos
					of her mother as if they are talismans, studying the buckles on
					her shoes as if they have some deep meaning. We suspect that if
					she knew more about her mother, if she had been in communication
					with her while she was still alive, Naomi wouldn’t so desperately
					need to insist that she can still communicate with her after her
					death.

The novel ends on a hopeful note. Naomi doesn’t explicitly
					or even implicitly rescind her earlier assertion that reliving the
					past will not help prevent future atrocities. But nearly all of
					the clippings and letters and other historical material included
					in the narrative to this point have demonstrated the breathtaking
					racism of Canadians. This final excerpt, in contrast, proves that
					there were at least some Canadians who were outraged over their
					country’s treatment of its citizens. The inclusion of this positive
					excerpt represents a shift, however small, from cynicism about the
					human capacity for evil toward acknowledgment that some people care
					about, and fight against, injustice.

