Mademoiselle Reisz is an unconventional and unpopular
older woman who serves as an inspiration to Edna throughout her
gradual awakening. A small, homely woman, Mademoiselle is distant and
reserved in her interaction with the other guests on Grand Isle. Although
she is often called upon to entertain people at gatherings with
her expert piano playing, she realizes that Edna is the only one of
the guests who is truly touched and moved by the music. Mademoiselle
Reisz seeks out Edna shortly after Robert’s departure to Mexico,
and her exchange with Edna by the shore fosters a relationship that
continues upon their return home to New Orleans. Edna is inexplicably
drawn to the older woman, whose lifestyle she envies, despite finding
her disagreeable and difficult. In fact, neither
Edna nor Mademoiselle Reisz can claim to be particularly fond of the
other, but Mademoiselle Reisz understands Edna’s passions and enjoys
the company and the opportunity to share her thoughts on art and
love.

Through her relationship with the pianist, Edna increases
her awareness of herself as a woman capable of passionate art and
passionate love. While the two capacities are interconnected, Mademoiselle
Reisz serves to further each specifically. Not only is the pianist
in touch with her own artistic emotions, she is, on a more pragmatic
level, in touch with the traveling Robert and is the only one to
whom he speaks of his love for Edna.

Mademoiselle Reisz is the woman that Edna could have become, had
she lived into her old age and remained independent of her husband
and children. Mademoiselle functions as a sort of muse for her young
companion, acting as a living example of an entirely self-sufficient
woman, who is ruled by her art and her passions, rather than by
the expectations of society. Mademoiselle Reisz acts as a foil for Adèle
Ratignolle, who lives the socially accepted lifestyle that Mademoiselle
Reisz rejected for solitude and freedom.

Take the Analysis of Major Characters Quick Quiz 

