so he could feel my breasts all perfume
						yes and his heart was going like mad and yes I said yes I will Yes.

The first of Molly’s eight giant “sentences” that comprise
					her interior monologue begins with her annoyance and surprise that
					Bloom has asked her to serve him breakfast in bed. Molly intuits
					that Bloom has had an orgasm today, and she thinks of his past dalliances
					with other women. She thinks of her afternoon of sex with the aggressive
					and well-endowed Boylan—a refreshing change after Bloom’s strange
					lovemaking techniques. On the other hand, Molly guesses Bloom is
					more virile than Boylan and remembers how handsome Bloom was when
					they were courting. Thinking of Josie and Denis Breen’s marriage,
					Molly feels that she and Bloom are perhaps mutually lucky.

	In Molly’s second sentence, she considers her various
					admirers: Boylan, who likes her feet; the tenor Bartell D’Arcy,
					who kissed her in church; Lt. Gardner, who died of fever in the
					Boer War. Molly ponders Bloom’s underwear fetish. Aroused, Molly
					anticipates seeing Boylan on Monday and their upcoming trip to Belfast
					alone. Molly’s thoughts turn briefly to the world of concert singing,
					annoyingly girlish Dublin singers, and Bloom’s help with her career.
					Molly remembers Boylan’s anger over Lenehan’s lousy Gold Cup race
					tip. Molly thinks Lenehan is creepy. Considering future meetings
					with Boylan, Molly resolves to lose some weight and wishes she had
					more money to dress stylishly. Bloom should quit the Freeman and
					get lucrative work in an office. Molly remembers going to Mr. Cuffe
					to plead for Bloom’s job back after he was fired—Cuffe stared at
					her breasts and politely refused.

	In her third sentence, Molly ponders beautiful female
					breasts and silly male genitalia. She thinks of the time Bloom suggested
					she pose naked for a photographer to make money. She associates
					pornographic pictures with the nymph picture that Bloom used to
					ineptly explain metempsychosis this morning. Back to breasts, she
					remembers how Bloom once suggested they milk her excess breast milk into
					tea. Molly imagines gathering all of Bloom’s outrageous ideas into
					a book, before her thoughts return to Boylan and the powerful release
					of her orgasm this afternoon.  

	Molly’s fourth sentence begins with a train whistle.
					Thoughts of the hot engine car lead her to thoughts about her Gibraltar
					childhood, her friendship there with Hester Stanhope and Hester’s
					husband “Wogger,” and how boring her life was after they left—she had
					resorted to writing herself letters. Molly thinks of how Milly sent
					her only a card this morning and Bloom a whole letter. Molly wonders
					if Boylan will send her a love letter. 

	Molly’s fifth sentence begins with her recollection of
					her first love letter—from Lieutenant Mulvey, whom she kissed under
					the Moorish wall in Gibraltar. She wonders what he is like now.
					Another train whistles, reminding Molly of Love’s Old Sweet
						Song and her upcoming performance. She is again dismissive
					of silly girl singers—Molly views herself as much more worldly.
					Considering her dark, Spanish looks which she inherited from her
					mother, Molly guesses that she could have been a stage star if she
					had not married Bloom. Molly shifts in bed to quietly release built-up
					gas, chiming with another train’s whistle.

	In her sixth sentence, Molly’s mind wanders from her
					Gibraltar girlhood to Milly. Molly does not like being alone in
					the house at night now—it was Bloom’s idea to send Milly to Mullingar
					to learn photography, because he sensed Molly and Boylan’s impending affair.
					Molly ponders her close but tense relationship with Milly, who has
					become wild and good-looking like Molly used to be. Molly realizes
					with frustration that her period is starting and gets up to use
					the chamberpot. She realizes that Boylan did not make her pregnant.
					Scenes from the afternoon run through her mind.

	In her seventh sentence, Molly climbs quietly back into
					bed and thinks back over their frequent moves, a result of Bloom’s
					shaky financial history. Molly worries that he has spent money on
					a woman today, as well as the Dignam family. Molly thinks of the
					men at Dignam’s funeral—they are nice, but Molly resents their condescension
					to Bloom. Molly recalls Simon Dedalus’s vocal talent and wonders
					about Simon’s son. Molly remembers meeting Stephen as a child and
					fantasizes that Stephen is probably not stuck-up, just young enough,
					and appealingly clean. Molly plans to read and study before he comes
					again so he will not think her stupid.

	In her eighth sentence, Molly thinks of how Bloom never embraces
					her, weirdly kissing her bottom instead. Molly reflects on how much
					better a place the world would be if it was governed by women. Considering
					the importance of mothers, she thinks again of Stephen, whose mother
					has just died, and of Rudy’s death, then stops this line of thought,
					for fear of becoming depressed. Molly imagines arousing Bloom tomorrow
					morning, then coldly telling him about her affair with Boylan to
					make him realize his culpability. Molly makes plans to buy flowers
					tomorrow, in case Stephen comes. Meditating on flowers and nature,
					the products of God, she thinks lovingly of the day she and Bloom
					spent outdoors on Howth, his marriage proposal, and her resoundingly
					positive response.

In Episode Seventeen, we saw Bloom-Odysseus return home
					and slay his opponents with magnaminity. Episode Eighteen, as the
					final third of the “Nostos,” both calls this triumphant ending into
					question and ultimately ratifies it. If we read Bloom’s final request
					for breakfast in bed as his reassertion of control of his household,
					then Molly’s indignant reaction to his request unsettles this patriarchal closure.
					Yet Episode Eighteen also depicts Molly going through the same trial
					of meeting the suitors-opponents that Bloom enacted in Episode Seventeen.
					And Molly seems to discard them one by one for Bloom, confirming
					the triumph of Bloom-Odysseus with her final affirmative “yes.” 

Early readers of Ulysses—preoccupied
					by the supposed obscenity of Molly’s monologue—viewed Molly as the
					archetypical whore. However, recent focus on the realistic quality
					of the monologue shows that Molly’s character comes across as believably
					contradictory and nuanced. Her thoughts reveal her to be extremely
					self-centered, yet she is also shown to be charitable and potentially sympathetic
					toward others, such as Josie Breen and Stephen. She comes across
					as uneducated but clever, opinionated, and refreshingly frank. She
					is hypocritical and self-contradictory but also highly perceptive—she
					ratifies our negative judgments of some characters, such as Lenehan.
					Finally, Molly’s monologue is highly entertaining—she has a sense
					of humor and a gift for mimicking the speech of others.											

Molly’s monologue contains facts and emotions that force
					us to revise our previous perspective of her and her marriage. For
					example, Bloom’s mental list of Molly’s infidelities in Episode
					Seventeen is here shown to be wildly incorrect—Boylan is Molly’s
					first sexual infidelity, and it has occurred only after more than
					ten sexless years (and perceived lack of affection) with Bloom.
					Molly’s thoughts offer a new perspective: it is Bloom who has been
					compromising her, and his own infidelities call his easy judgment
					of Molly as unfaithful into question. 

However, though Molly gets the final say, her perspective
					is also dramatized as fallible, specifically through her meditations
					on Stephen, which are misinformed and idealized. Molly fantasizes about
					Stephen’s humility, friendliness, and cleanliness—three characteristics
					that do not apply to Stephen as we have seen him. This technique
					does not demonstrate Molly’s individual misperception, as much as
					the lesson of perspective in Ulysses: no single
					character’s perspective will be sufficient to pass judgment.											Though
					Molly’s feelings toward Bloom oscillate wildly throughout her monologue,
					as the episode comes to a close, her thoughts center more on Bloom and
					Stephen-Rudy and less on Boylan and other suitors. The sexual desire
					prevalent through her monologue becomes more evidently underwritten
					with a compatible desire for the intimacy of the family structure.
					Molly’s mental return to the scene on Howth that Bloom has also
					thought of several times today shows the power of memory to provide
					a source of continued intimacy between them, even if her final yes
					may be in reference to Mulvey or Bloom. This uncertainty is characteristic
					of Joyce’s endings, and it serves to remind us that we have witnessed
					only a single day in the lives of the Blooms—progress may have been
					made in their estranged marriage, but there certainly was not a
					complete turnaround. On the other hand, the unrestrained affirmation
					and joy of the final lines cannot be denied.





