Marius meets a group of fellow law students who, like
					him, are becoming increasingly involved in politics at the expense
					of their studies. One of these students, Courfeyrac, becomes Marius’s
					neighbor and introduces him to a secret political society called
					the Friends of the ABC. Led by the fiery Enjolras, the group believes
					ardently in social change. Marius thinks he has found an outlet
					for his political frustrations. One day, however, he argues with
					the other members of the group over Napoléon. Marius defends Napoléon
					and calls his empire a glorious episode in French history, while
					the other members are more interested in absolute democratic freedom.

Disappointed by the Friends of the ABC, Marius quits the
					group and begins to live on his own. He passes his law exams with
					flying colors but continues to live in utter poverty. He saves money
					however he can, but he often finds it is not enough. Marius’s grandfather misses
					him and his aunt often tries to send him money, but he refuses to
					accept his family’s support. The narrator concludes that poverty has
					been a blessing in disguise for Marius: freed from social obligations,
					he has been able to see what kind of man he really is. He becomes
					friends with the churchwarden, Mabeuf, who helps him through difficult
					times by getting him a job at a bookstore.

Despite his poverty, Marius develops into an attractive
					young man who often turns women’s heads as he walks down the street.
					He is indifferent to women, however, until the day he sees Cosette
					sitting next to the elderly Valjean on a park bench in the Luxembourg
					Gardens. Marius is inexplicably drawn to her and goes to the gardens every
					day to catch a glimpse of her. He does not know Cosette’s name,
					so he calls her “Lanoire,” a nickname (coined by Courfeyrac) which
					means “the black one,” because of her dark clothes. Courfeyrac has
					dubbed her companion “Leblanc,” (“the white one”) because of Valjean’s
					white hair.

After a six-month absence, Marius returns to the gardens
					to find that the girl has blossomed into a beautiful young woman.
					Marius instantly falls in love with her. He discovers a handkerchief
					with the letter “U” stitched into it, which he believes to be hers,
					and Marius renames her Ursula. He improves his wardrobe and begins
					to follow the couple around the gardens. Leblanc quickly figures
					out what is going on. The following day, he sits at a different
					bench to see if Marius will follow. When Marius follows, Leblanc
					gives him a cold stare. Marius cannot help himself and follows his
					love home one day, asking the caretaker of the building on what
					floor the girl and the old man live. About a week later, the couple
					moves out without leaving a forwarding address.

The narrator introduces the criminal underworld of Paris,
					with its four ringleaders, Montparnasse, Babet, Claquesous, and
					Gueulemer. Each of these shadowy figures has his own subversive
					talents, but they operate together, like one monstrous figure with
					four heads. As a group, they are collectively called “Patron-Minette.” They
					control all of the crime in their district of Paris and specialize
					in ambushes. Whenever anyone in their area wants to plan a robbery, he
					presents his plan to Patron-Minette, and the four men refine and execute
					it.

Marius’s change in political allegiance from the Bourbon
					monarchy to the Friends of the ABC signals his break from the identity
					that others have imposed on him. Although Marius does harbor a growing
					interest in politics, he quickly grows tired of the rhetoric of Enjolras
					and the other Friends of the ABC. He begins to realize that his
					interest in politics has less to do with his views about freedom than
					with his sense of debt to his father, Pontmercy. Nonetheless, Marius’s
					brief affiliation with the Friends of the ABC is beneficial since
					the experience teaches him to articulate his own personal beliefs.
					Marius’s rift with Gillenormand, his refusal to accept money from
					his family, and his sudden adulation of his father are all manifestations
					of his attempts to figure out who he is and what his beliefs are.
					In breaking away from Gillenormand, Marius takes his first steps
					toward independence, and the ideas he explores and then rejects
					with the Friends of the ABC further enhance his self-understanding.

Marius pursues Cosette with an innocence that is touching
					to us but threatening to Valjean. The narrator tells us that Marius
					is not well-versed in love and intrigue. Indeed, Valjean’s tests
					of Marius’s interest in Cosette show that Marius is in fact a novice
					at love and flirtation. Whereas a more experienced man might try
					to mask his intent or directly approach the object of his desires,
					Marius is content to follow Cosette around the park innocently.
					Marius’s charm lies in this very innocence, and the purity of his
					intentions, oddly enough, represents perhaps the greatest threat
					to Valjean. After all, it would be much easier for Valjean to justify
					protecting Cosette from a money-driven or sex-hungry prowler than
					from someone so completely and genuinely in love as Marius.

Hugo appeals to a wider readership by including scenes
					from the dangerous yet alluring Parisian criminal underworld. These
					scenes allow us to compare Valjean to real criminals. The emergence
					of complex crime rings was a popular topic in mid-nineteenth-century Paris
					and inspired the imagination of many authors of the time. Hugo describes
					the members of Patron-Minette in a tabloid fashion that is meant
					to mimic the sensationalist journalism of the time, which thrived
					on relating the darker side of Parisian life. Significantly, all
					the members of the criminal underworld change identities with ease,
					which reminds us that despite our warm feelings for Valjean, he
					is still considered a criminal. Although Valjean is certainly not
					immoral like Thénardier and his cronies, he also has a criminal background
					that emerged from poverty. The skills they have in common remind
					us that Valjean is, early in the novel, not so different from the
					men who soon try to rob him.

