Edward Prendick 

The novel’s narrator and protagonist. Stranded on Moreau’s island after a shipwreck, he attempts to understand the nature of Moreau’s experiments and the Beast Folk he has created. An educated, civil man who is averse to conflict and sympathetic to the pain of others, Prendick discovers that he is capable of cunning and even violence when his own survival demands it.   

Read an in-depth analysis of Edward Prendick

Dr. Moreau 

The mad scientist, overlord of the island, and antagonist of the novel. Having been banished from London for his gruesome experiments, Moreau has taken his operation to a remote island in the Pacific, where he can conduct his research with impunity. There, he has created a large number of half-human Beast People, over whom he rules like an angry god.  

Read an in-depth analysis of Dr. Moreau

Montgomery 

Dr. Moreau’s assistant and Prendick’s rescuer. A mysterious and evasive character, Montgomery is reluctant to divulge anything to Prendick about his own personal history or the nature of Moreau’s research. Like Moreau, Montgomery was apparently banished from London for some sort of youthful transgression.   

Read an in-depth analysis of Montgomery  

M’ling 

Montgomery’s grotesquely proportioned assistant, who is eventually revealed to be part bear, part dog, and part ox. One of Moreau’s more successful creations, M’ling can walk upright and speak English, but he elicits disgust and revulsion from humans and animals alike. The servile M’ling is nonetheless loyal to Montgomery, tolerating his frequent abuse.  

Captain Davies 

The mad captain of the Ipecacuanha, the schooner that rescues Prendick. Constantly drunk and enraged, he curses Montgomery and his animal cargo, and especially M’ling, whom he calls a “devil.” Exceptionally cruel, he sets Prendick adrift in the dingey when the ship reaches the island. 

Constans 

A sailor from the Lady Vain who dies when attempting to board Prendick’s dingey. The story of his death is reported incorrectly in the news. 

Helmar 

A passenger from the Lady Vain who floats at sea for days on the dingey with Prendick. Helmar entertains desperate thoughts of cannibalism while waiting to die or be rescued.  

Sailor 

An unnamed sailor from the Lady Vain who floats at sea for days on the dinghy with Prendick. Sinks to his death along with Helmar after the two fight.  

The Sayer of the Law 

A priest-like leader of the Beast Folk. A grey, hairy creature with talons, he leads the other Beast Folk in the recitation of the Law. Eventually, he reverts to his beastly instincts and attacks Montgomery.   

Leopard-man 

The most dangerous of the Beast Folk. The Leopard-man drinks on all fours, kills rabbits, and hunts Prendick at dusk, all in violation of the Law. He brazenly attacks Moreau when challenged, an act that encourages the rest of the Beast Folk to rebel.  

Hyena-Swine 

Prendick’s enemy during the latter chapters of the novel. Fully reverted to his wild state, the Hyena-swine refuses to accept Prendick’s authority and terrorizes him day and night.  

Dog-man (St. Bernard-man) 

Prendick’s loyal companion and protector during the latter chapters of the novel. Part St. Bernard, the Dog-man has a “slavish” devotion to Prendick. He is eventually killed by the Hyena-swine.   

Ape-man 

One of Prendick’s favorite Beast Folk. The Ape-man shows Prendick the cavern where the Beast Folk reside and introduces him to the Sayer of the Law. Ape-man fancies himself Prendick’s peer since they both have five fingers, but he often talks nonsense, which Prendick finds silly and endearing.  

Satyr 

An inquisitive and skeptical creature, part ape and part goat, who notices that Prendick lacks the omniscience and omnipotence of other humans on the island. His skepticism serves to undermine the humans’ authority over the Beast Folk. 

Sloth Creature 

A little pink creature that is part sloth. Shy and quiet, the sloth creature becomes one of  Prendick’s loyal Beast Folk after the revolt, but he eventually loses his human qualities and returns to living in the trees.  

