Torn between two extreme options—unhappy domesticity or
a dramatic escape to Argentina for marriage—Eveline has no possibility of
a moderately content life. Her dilemma does not illustrate indecisiveness
but rather the lack of options for someone in her position. On the
docks, when she must make a choice once and for all, Eveline remembers
her promise to her mother to keep the family together. So close
to escape, Eveline revises her view of her life at home, remembering
the small kindnesses: her father’s caring for her when she was sick,
a family picnic before her mother died. These memories overshadow
the reality of her abusive father and deadening job, and her sudden
certainty comes as an epiphany—she must remain with what is familiar.
When faced with the clear choice between happiness and unhappiness,
Eveline chooses unhappiness, which frightens her less than her intense
emotions for Frank. Eveline’s nagging sense of family duty stems
from her fear of love and an unknown life abroad, and her decision
to stay in Dublin renders her as just another figure in the crowd
of Dubliners watching lovers and friends depart the city. 

Eveline holds an important place in the overall narrative
of Dubliners. Her story is the first in the collection
that uses third-person narration, the first in the collection to
focus on a female protagonist, and the only one in the collection
that takes a character’s name as the title. Eveline is also the
first central adult character. For all of these reasons, she marks
a crucial transition in the collection: Eveline in many ways is
just another Dubliner, but she also broadens the perspective of Dubliners.
Her story, rather than being limited by the first-person narration
of earlier stories, suggests something about the hardships and limitations
of women in early twentieth-century Dublin in general. Eveline’s
tortured decision about her life also sets a tone of restraint and
fear that resonates in many of the later stories. Other female characters
in Dubliners explore different harsh conditions
of life in Dublin, but Eveline, in facing and rejecting a life-altering
decision, remains the most tragic.

Take the Analysis of Major Characters Quick Quiz

