Ginny grabs Harry’s hand and gently tugs him back. Harry
					asks her who else is dead, and Ginny says that Bill was badly hurt
					by Fenir Greyback, but no one is dead. They reach the hospital wing.
					Neville is asleep, and Ron, Hermione, Luna, Tonks, and Lupin are
					gathered around another bed, where Bill Weasley is lying, his face
					unrecognizable. Madam Pomfrey tells Harry that no charms will cure
					his disfigurement. Ron asks if Bill is a werewolf now, and Lupin
					tells him that because Greyback was not transformed when he attacked, Bill
					will probably not be a true werewolf. Still, Lupin does caution that
					there could be some contamination. Ginny tells the group that Dumbledore
					is dead. Lupin collapses, and Tonks asks how it happened. Harry
					tells them about Snape. Outside, Dumbledore’s Phoenix is singing.

The group stands in silence. Professor McGonagall walks
					in and tells everyone that the Weasleys are on their way. Harry
					repeats the news. McGonagall is shocked, and Lupin and Tonks both
					speculate on what it was about Snape that made Dumbledore trust
					him so deeply. Mr. and Mrs. Weasley and Fleur rush in. When Mrs.
					Weasley sees Bill’s face, she screams and starts to cry. Mrs. Weasley
					assumes that Fleur will no longer wish to marry Bill, but Fleur
					is offended and tells her that she still intends to marry him. Tonks
					glares at Lupin and tells him that just because someone is a werewolf
					doesn’t mean they cannot be loved. Harry realizes that Tonks has
					been in love with Lupin, not Sirius. Hagrid enters and tells Professor
					McGonagall that he has moved the body and alerted the Ministry.
					McGonagall asks Hagrid to tell the Heads of House to meet her in
					her office.

Professor McGonagall asks Harry what he and Dumbledore
					had been doing that evening, but Harry tells her he cannot betray
					Dumbledore’s confidence. Professor Slughorn, Sprout, and Flitwick
					enter the office with Hagrid. Moments later, one of Dumbledore’s
					portraits tells Professor McGonagall that Scrimgeour has left the
					Ministry and will be at Hogwarts shortly. McGonagall tells the group that
					she is not certain Hogwarts should reopen next year. Harry asks
					about Dumbledore’s funeral, and the faculty agrees that he should
					be buried on the grounds and that students should be allowed to
					attend. Harry walks through the common room without saying a word
					to anyone. Ron asks Harry if he and Dumbledore succeeded in getting
					a Horcrux, and Harry tells him no. Classes and examinations are
					suspended. Hermione tells Harry that Eileen Prince was Snape’s mother,
					which is why Snape called himself the Half-Blood Prince.

The day of Dumbledore’s funeral, Hagrid carries Dumbledore’s body,
					wrapped in purple cloth, down the aisle. Harry cannot hold back
					his tears any longer. Harry thinks of how many people have tried
					to protect him and died while doing it: his father, his mother, his
					godfather, and Dumbledore. After the funeral, Harry tells Ginny that
					they cannot be together because Voldemort will eventually use her
					to get to him. Ginny is upset but understands. Harry walks back to
					the castle. Ron and Hermione catch up, and they speculate on whether
					the school will close. Harry tells them that he’s not coming back.
					Harry will spend the summer with the Dursleys per Dumbledore’s wishes
					and return to Godric’s Hollow, where his Wizarding life started.
					Harry also wishes to visit the graves of his parents. After that,
					Harry will begin his search for the remaining Horcruxes. Ron and
					Hermione tell Harry that they will accompany him to the Dursleys
					and will stay by his side from there on. Ron reminds them that they
					need to return to the Burrow for Bill and Fleur’s wedding. Knowing
					that the future holds a long and difficult journey, Harry enjoys
					one last moment of peace with his two best friends.

Rowling closes the book by emphasizing the importance
					of unconditional love. No matter what happens, or what unfortunate
					circumstances may exist, love can overcome nearly any perceived difficulties.
					Fleur, shocking Hermione, Ginny, and Mrs. Weasley, announces that
					she still loves and intends to marry Bill despite his disfigurement
					and the possibility that he may be a werewolf. Tonks admits her
					love for Lupin, who had previously refused her because he felt a
					werewolf was unfit to be loved. The group begins to realize that
					the only thing Dumbledore would have wanted would be for more love
					to exist in the world. Nevertheless, Harry is finally coming to
					terms with the viciousness of Voldemort’s mission and realizes that
					anything or anyone is he is close to will eventually be used against
					him. For these reasons, Harry is forced to end his budding relationship
					with Ginny Weasley, which is devastating for both of them. Harry
					cannot act as an average wizard and is forced to make sacrifices
					that most seventeen-year-olds can barely conceive of.

Meanwhile, the future of Hogwarts remains uncertain. For many,
					Harry included, Hogwarts has been the only steady and consistent
					part of their lives. Likewise, many wizards find it incredibly difficult
					to imagine Hogwarts continuing on without Dumbledore in charge.
					The scope of Dumbledore’s funeral reminds everyone of just how far
					reaching and indiscriminate his influence was. Dumbledore made an
					effort to befriend and cooperate with creatures of all kinds, and
					they all wish to pay their proper respects. Even though the final
					chapters of Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince are
					terribly sad, the novel still manages to end on an upbeat note,
					with Harry savoring the companionship of his very best friends.
					Harry does not insist that his friends accompany him on his quest,
					but he also does not protest when they calmly inform him that they
					plan to follow him as he collects and destroys the remaining Horcruxes. Certainly,
					Ron and Hermione must feel some reservations about leaving Hogwarts
					before graduation, about giving up their schooling to accompany
					Harry on his predestined adventure, but they do not appear to think
					twice about their decision to stand by their best friend. Although
					Harry, Ron, and Hermione still mourn the loss of Dumbledore, they
					are able to help each other through the difficulty of his death
					and embark on this new adventure hand in hand.

