Dinah’s family begins preparations for the journey to
					Mamre. On the road, Zilpah tells Dinah stories about her famous
					grandmother Rebecca, who is a renowned healer and oracle. They finally
					arrive at Rebecca’s tent, an enormous red, yellow, and blue canopy
					where travelers visit from every direction. Dinah sees her grandmother, who
					is a tall, imposing woman with black eyes decorated with Egyptian-style
					makeup. Rebecca and Jacob greet one another formally. Ten servant
					women, each of whom calls herself “Deborah,” attend Rebecca. When
					Jacob’s blind father Isaac arrives, the two men weep in each other’s
					arms, and Isaac runs his hands over the faces of Jacob’s sons. Once
					the guests have all arrived, the feast begins. When Rebecca does
					not acknowledge the fine meal Jacob’s wives have prepared or compliment
					the beer, Dinah becomes annoyed. After dinner, Rebecca calls Leah
					into the tent for an interview, and they talk late into the night.
					Over the next few days, Jacob’s other wives are called in one by
					one to meet with Rebecca. 

Tabea arrives with her family. Dinah notices that Tabea
					wears a woman’s belt because she has begun menstruating. Rebecca
					takes note of Tabea’s new status and approaches Dinah’s aunt, Adath. Rebecca
					quickly becomes angry when she learns that Tabea was not ushered
					into womanhood with the proper ceremony in the red tent and was
					instead shut up alone when she first began to bleed. Rebecca slaps
					Adath, curses her, and exiles them from the tent. Tabea, on her
					knees, begs to be allowed to become a Deborah and serve her grandmother,
					but she is refused. Dinah begins to hate her grandmother. Leah explains
					that Rebecca is defending the ways of their women, which are in
					danger of being forgotten. Leah goes on to tell Dinah that there
					is a secret that women know which men do not. The cleansing of their
					bodies with blood each month is a gift given to women by the great
					mother spirit Innana. Men assume this is a painful and bothersome
					curse, but the women know it is a gift to harmonize with the moon
					and to rest and restore themselves inside the red tent each month.
					That night, Adath and Tabea disappear. 

For the next few days, Dinah avoids Rebecca. As they are
					prepare to depart, her grandmother requests that she stay behind
					in Mamre for three months. Leah insists Dinah obey because it is
					an honor. Dinah becomes angry but vows not to cry. The weeks pass
					slowly without her family. Every seventh day, her grandmother bakes
					offerings for the goddesses, while Dinah helps the women prepare
					food for the pilgrims who arrive daily. Esau visits often, and it
					becomes clear that he is a dutiful son and a good man. Rebecca criticizes
					his wives as well as Dinah’s mothers, since she feels no one is
					a good enough mate for her sons. Rebecca’s comments anger Dinah,
					but she keeps silent. 

Dinah begins to warm up to her grandmother somewhat as
					she witnesses Rebecca heal and prophesize for traders and pilgrims. One
					day, news arrives than Werenro, the messenger with the red hair,
					has been murdered. Her remains have been found on the edge of the
					city with her tongue cut out. The Deborahs weep. Rebecca tells Dinah
					that she knows that she hates her for banishing Tabea but that she
					must understand she did it to protect the line of women. She goes
					on to predict unhappiness in Dinah’s future, although she cannot
					name the circumstances specifically. Despite this bad news, she
					predicts that Dinah will have a long life. She forgives Dinah for hating
					her. Dinah leaves at last, without even a nod from her grandmother.

Diamant creates a very unsympathetic character in Rebecca.
					Those familiar with Hebrew scripture are likely to be shocked by
					this harsh, vain, seemly impervious woman who scoffs at her husband and
					finds a reason to dislike even the loveliest of her daughters-in-law.
					She constantly fiddles with her makeup and chews mint to keep her
					breath sweet, vanities that make her the absolute antithesis of everything
					Dinah has come to expect of a woman’s character. She rarely cooks,
					except to make weekly offerings to the goddesses. Instead of family
					members, she surrounds herself with indistinguishable female servants,
					and she worries constantly about her appearance. Rebecca’s haughty
					and thoughtless treatment of Dinah’s mothers and of Tabea further
					strengthens Dinah’s intial dislike for her grandmother, although,
					after staying with her for several months, she admits that Rebecca
					does do some good in the world. Her kindness, though, seems to be
					only directed at strangers—not not toward her own family members.
					There are several reasons Diamant may have chosen to create such
					a figure: Rebecca is a female character of formidable power, who
					offsets the power of the male characters. Her presence increases
					the dramatic conflict in the novel as she teaches Dinah a few lessons
					in human behavior. Most important, her stern demeanor helps to prepare
					Dinah for the battles that lie ahead of her. 

With the exile of Tabea, Dinah experiences injustice for
					the first time. Other than the death of Ruti, as well as the loss
					of many sisters and brothers through miscarriages and stillbirths,
					she has yet to experience true unfairness. Even though Rebecca favored
					Tabea among Esau’s children, she is banished, because her mother
					chose not to honor the ways of the women in their family. Tabea’s
					life immediately loses any value, and she can longer associate with Dinah.
					The loss of her dear friend and cousin to the apparent whim of her
					unfeeling grandmother devastates Dinah. She cannot reconcile the
					actions and outbursts of her irrational grandmother, because she
					has never in her life met a woman for whom family is not the top priority.
					With this emotional episode, Diamant slowly brings the story toward
					its climax. The incident with Tabea strengthens Dinah’s alliance
					to her mothers, their family’s traditions, and the sanctity of the
					red tent. 

Rebecca foresees that Dinah will face unhappiness in her
					future but will live a long life; though the prediction comes true,
					the prophecy does not have much impact on Dinah’s life. Dinah does
					not dwell on Rebecca’s pronouncement just as she did not dwell on Zilpah’s
					water prophecy, nor does she makes decisions based on either of
					them. They are just words that hold considerably less sway over
					her life than the everyday words spoken to her by her other mothers.
					Dinah does occasionally ponder her fate and looks to find links
					to her prophesies, but she rarely gives them much credence. She
					says to Benia later in the book: “When I was a child I was told that
					I would only find contentment beside a river, but it was a false prophecy.
					The water soothes my heart and settles my thoughts, but I found
					my joy in dry hills.” After Rebecca’s prediction, Dinah makes no
					comment and appears not to give it much thought. Although Rebecca’s
					prophecy heightens the sense of tension with foreshadowing, her
					words do not impact the way that Dinah conducts herself. 

