The author of the book and one of its two main subjects. Over the course of the book, Moore grows from a troublemaker who rebels against authority into a successful student, soldier, and community leader.

The book’s other subject, a man who shares the author’s name. Although his early life shares similarities with Moore’s, Wes is hotheaded and defiant, and he falls into a life of violence and crime that ultimately leads him to prison. 

The mother of Moore, Nikki, and Shani. Determined and strict, Joy enrolls Moore in military school to protect him from the violence and drugs in their neighborhood and set him on the path for success.

The smart and ambitious mother of Wes and Tony. 

Wes’s older brother. Tony is protective of Wes and makes several misguided attempts to keep his brother from following him into the drug business. 

Moore’s older sister. Nikki is seven years older than Moore and looks after him while their mother works. 

Moore’s younger sister. Shani loves reading and does very well in school. 

The father of Moore and Shani. A hard-working reporter and loving father, he dies when Moore is three years old. 

Joy’s father and the first Black minister in the Dutch Reformed Church. 

Joy’s mother. She is strict but loving, and helps raise Moore and his siblings in the Bronx.

A friend of Wes’s. A football player and a jokester, he is one of the few members of Wes’s class to graduate from high school. 

Wes’s father, an alcoholic who is absent for most of Wes’s life.

Nikki’s father. Charismatic and rebellious, Bill becomes an alcoholic and drug addict. 

Mary’s mother. Alma promises to support Mary as she attends college while raising a baby, but Alma dies before Mary can graduate. 

The first Black mayor of Baltimore. Kurt is highly educated and was first elected when he was only 38 years old.

Moore’s friend from the Bronx. Justin is one of few Black students at Riverdale.

The mother of Wes’s third and fourth children and a heroin addict. 

An older student at Valley Forge who commands everyone’s respect.

A Baltimore police officer and jewelry store security guard killed in robbery.

