Upon arriving at Jack’s house, twelve-year-old Bee makes
					the entire family feel self-conscious. Bee is elegant, worldly,
					and self-possessed, and Jack says that he admires her but also feels
					threatened by her. On Christmas day, Jack and Bee have a conversation
					about Bee’s mother, Tweedy. Bee tells Jack that Tweedy looks anxious
					all the time and that she believes Tweedy’s agitation stems from
					the persistent absences of her husband, Malcolm. Bee says Tweedy’s
					real problem is that Tweedy doesn’t know who she is. As Bee talks,
					comparing Tweedy to Babette, Jack gets the disturbing sensation
					that Bee is attempting to communicate with him in some different,
					mysterious way and that she’s trying to pry secret information from
					him.

The next morning, Jack takes Bee to the airport. As they
					drive, quietly listening to the radio, Jack notices that his daughter
					is watching him carefully, with a compassionate yet condescending
					expression on her face.

On his way back to the airport, Jack stops at a graveyard, marked
					with a sign that reads “The Old Burying Ground.” The burying ground
					is beyond the noise of the traffic, and Jack stands there for a
					moment, waiting to feel “the peace that is supposed to descend upon
					the dead.” Jack says that the dead have a kind of presence; an accumulated
					energy that the living can detect. 

Mr. Treadwell’s sister, Gladys, dies from what the doctors
					call “a lingering dread,” resulting from the four days she and her
					brother were lost at the mall. Jack says that whenever he reads
					obituaries he automatically compares the age of the deceased to
					his own age. He speculates how great men of history like Attila
					the Hun must have felt about the prospect of death. Jack wants to
					believe that Atilla the Hun met death without fear, accepting it
					as a natural part of human existence. 

Over breakfast, Babette comments to Jack that their life
					is good. When Jack asks what brought on that observation, Babette
					says that she felt it needed to be said, before telling Jack that
					she has bad dreams. They once again discuss the question “Who will
					die first?” Babette is adamant that she wants to die before Jack
					but believes that as long as there are children in the house, nothing
					serious can happen. Jack counters her, saying that he wants to die
					first, because without her he would feel incomplete. They continue
					to debate, back and forth, into the night.

Later, Babette leaves to teach her posture class. Murray
					comes over to talk to the children, because he believes that children
					are open to special forms of consciousness. Jack goes to make Murray
					a cup of coffee, and Heinrich chastises him for not doing it efficiently, thereby
					expending huge amounts of unnecessary motion. Jack admits to us
					that he does not actually want to die first—though he doesn’t want
					to be alone after Babette’s death either. Jack doesn’t know who
					to plead his case to, because he doesn’t know “who decides these
					things.”

Later, while watching television, Babette’s face comes
					onto the screen. Everyone is frightened and confused for a moment,
					until they realize that a local cable station must be televising
					Babette’s class. The program doesn’t seem to be producing any sound,
					but the family watches Babette’s image, awestruck, anyway. Jack
					says that they’re being penetrated and irradiated by Babette’s image.
					When the image of his mother vanishes, Wilder begins to cry softly,
					while the rest of the children eagerly run downstairs to greet Babette. 

The scene at the Old Burying Ground represents perhaps
					the first moment in which Jack doesn’t find himself bombarded by
					white noise of any kind. The small graveyard lies beyond the technological sounds
					of traffic or factories, and the solitude frees Jack from human
					babble as well. Here, Jack enters a meditative state, and a moment
					of eerie stillness settles over the novel. For a man who claims
					to suffer from an irrational, gripping fear of death, Jack spends
					a lot of time surrounding himself with the object of his fear. He
					specializes in the study of Hitler, one of the most murderous despots
					in modern history, and he names his son—evocatively, if not intentionally—after
					Heinrich Himmler, a cold-blooded Nazi leader. Jack feels soothed
					by the presence of Hitler, just as he now seems to find tranquility
					in the graveyard. Jack often speaks of hiding within Hitler, allowing
					the tyrant’s huge aura to render Jack’s own anxieties small, insignificant,
					and manageable. His meditative moment at the Old Burying Ground
					might spring from a similar impulse: perhaps Jack wants to hide
					among the dead, so as to avoid facing the painful prospect of his
					own solitary, terrifying death.

Jack’s interlude in the graveyard ends with Jack entreating, “May
					the days be aimless. Let the seasons drift. Do not advance the action
					according to a plan.” In making this plea, Jack seeks to be released
					from the structures of plot. In the literary sense, plot could very
					aptly be defined as “the plan according to which the action is advanced.”
					Plots are what lend stories their momentum; a good plot implies
					that a novel will advance meaningfully, and a well-constructed plot
					ensures a satisfying conclusion. However, when it comes to human
					lives,only one conclusion is ever truly possible: death. The more
					momentum Jack’s life gains—the more heavily “plotted” the action
					of his life seems—the faster he speeds toward his greatest fear.
					But if he can arrest his life, slowing it down and sending it on
					a purposeless ramble, he might be able to avoid having to ever reach
					a conclusion. Aimlessness becomes a defense against death. 

Jack’s exhortation recalls the opening lines of Chapter
					5, when, “fearing some kind of deft acceleration,” he tells himself,
					“Let’s enjoy these aimless days while we can.” Soon after these
					lines appear in Chapter 5, Jack jerks awake with a sudden muscle
					contraction, which he initially confuses for a death spasm. Here,
					as in the scene at the burial plot, the plea for aimlessness feels
					like a mantra or a prayer, a feeble attempt to push back the terror.
					However, in each case, the plea goes unanswered. In the earlier
					chapter, Jack jerks awake and finds his mind racing, as he wonders
					if death will be just as abrupt as a muscle contraction. Jack’s
					questions are answered only by the blankly ominous sound of blue
					jeans, tumbling in the dryer. At the Old Burying Ground, Jack’s
					supplication similarly gets no answer, since the chapter ends just
					after Jack speaks those lines. The very next chapter, however, opens
					with a recitation of obituaries, suggesting that though death may
					be delayed, it cannot be denied forever.

