Harry Potter is asleep, face pressed up against his bedroom
					window at Number Twelve Privet Drive, the home of his Aunt Petunia,
					Uncle Vernon, and despicable cousin Dudley Dursley. Clutched in
					Harry’s hand is a letter from Dumbledore, who has asked to escort
					Harry to the Burrow. Harry wakes up to see Dumbledore approaching
					the door. Dumbledore steps inside and greets Petunia, Vernon, and Dudley.
					Harry notices that Dumbledore’s hand is shriveled and blackened,
					but Dumbledore will not yet tell him why. When Harry leaves the
					living room to pack his trunk, Dumbledore reminds the Dursleys that
					when Dumbledore left Harry on their front porch, sixteen years ago,
					he put a spell on the house causing Harry to have powerful protection
					as long as he called this house home.

Even though Harry’s time at Four Privet Drive has been
					miserable, it has kept him safe. Now Dumbledore requests that the
					Dursleys allow Harry to return home once more before he comes of
					age at seventeen and the spell is broken. They reluctantly comply,
					and Harry and Dumbledore leave together. Harry has not yet learned how
					to Apparate (transport himself instantaneously through magic) and
					must clutch Dumbledore’s arm as they travel. For Harry, it feels like
					being smushed through a rubber tube. Dumbledore and Harry arrive
					at the home of one of Dumbledore’s old friends, Horace Slughorn.
					Harry assumes that Slughorn will be replacing Dolores Umbridge as
					Defense Against the Dark Arts professor. Slughorn is preoccupied
					with making the acquaintance of potentially influential young wizards,
					and Harry unknowingly entices him to accept Dumbledore’s offer to
					return to the school.

Harry and Dumbledore Apparate again, arriving, moments
					later at the Burrow where Harry’s schoolmate, Ron Weasley, lives
					with his family. Dumbledore reminds Harry that no matter what the Daily
						Prophet prints about Harry being the “Chosen One,” only Harry
					and Dumbledore know the true contents of the prophecy. Dumbledore
					suggests that Harry share the prophecy with his two best friends,
					Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger. Dumbledore also tells Harry that
					he will be giving Harry private lessons this year, and that O.W.L.
					scores will be arriving soon, and requests that Harry keep his Invisibility
					Cloak with him at all times.

Inside the Burrow, Harry sees Tonks, an Auror with the
					Order of the Phoenix. Although she is usually chipper and bright,
					Tonks seems dejected, even ill. Harry stays in the room of Fred
					and George Weasley, twin brothers who have opened a joke shop called
					Weasleys’ Wizard Wheezes. Harry is awoken by the shouts of his two
					best friends, Ron and Hermione. They are eager to hear about Harry’s night
					with Dumbledore, and he fills them in on his visit to Horace Slughorn.
					Ron’s younger sister, Ginny, wanders in, complaining about her brother
					Bill’s beautiful fiancé, Fleur, whom she calls “Phlegm.” Ginny,
					Hermione, and Mrs. Weasley all dislike the gorgeous Fleur. Once
					Ginny leaves, Harry tells his friends that he will be receiving
					private lessons from Dumbledore this term and shares the contents
					of the prophecy. He also reminds his friends that they should be
					receiving their scores from the O.W.L. examinations they took last
					year at Hogwarts. Hermione, an extremely conscientious student,
					panics and runs downstairs. Hermione receives all Oustandings, save
					an Exceeds Expectations in Defense Against the Dark Arts. Harry
					and Ron both do well, passing seven O.W.L.s each. Harry receives
					an Outstanding in Defense Against the Dark Arts. Harry is pleased
					with his scores but a bit sad that his Potions mark, Outstanding,
					is not strong enough for him to be an Auror.

As Rowling emphasizes, the main reason Harry has been
					successful as a young wizard is the steady, unwavering help of his
					loyal companions and closest friends, Ron and Hermione. Hermione
					is bright and careful, while Ron is brave and strong. When Dumbledore
					suggests that Harry share the contents of the prophecy with his
					friends, Rowling further emphasizes Dumbledore’s wisdom. Clearly, Dumbledore
					understands both Harry’s strengths and his weaknesses. When Harry
					finally has the opportunity to tell Ron and Hermione the truth about
					what happened at the Ministry, he experiences enormous relief. Harry
					has never been a perfect student, and his magical abilities often
					fail him; Ron and Hermione are as much a part of Harry’s quest as
					Harry himself, and each of his successes and failures falls on their
					heads as well as his. They are each at their most powerful when
					they are together, and Rowling is careful to emphasize the importance
					of teamwork, trust, love, and cooperation when fighting off evil.
					As explained at the close of Book V, Harry’s capacity to love and
					be loved is his greatest strength as a wizard. Nowhere is this capacity
					more evident than in his relationship to his two best friends.

Horace Slughorn’s excitement about meeting Harry is the
					first sign that Harry will be treated differently at Hogwarts this
					year. While Harry has always enjoyed a certain amount of notoriety,
					the Daily Prophet has spent the entire summer referring
					to him exclusively as the “Chosen One,” and the Wizarding world
					has responded with a mix of fear and admiration. Even though Slughorn
					is initially reluctant to return to Hogwarts, Harry unknowingly woos
					him back, inadvertently preying on Slughorn’s desire to surround
					himself with influential young wizards. Regardless, Harry has never
					wanted to be treated as anything other than an equal by his peers,
					and all of this attention makes him extremely uncomfortable. Given
					his tumultuous childhood and his parents’ murder at the hands of
					Voldemort, Harry simply wants to attend school and feel normal.
					Unfortunately, he was marked for life from the moment he was born.

The results of the O.W.L. exams are very important in
					determining the futures of young wizards. Although Harry does remarkably well,
					his grades are nowhere near as high as Hermione’s. Rowling reminds
					her readers once again that Harry is imperfect, subject to the same
					stresses and failures as any student, and that in spite of his powers
					and reputation as the “Chosen One,” he still has to study and often
					comes up short academically. Harry does receive an Exceeds Expectations
					in Defense Against the Dark Arts, which is telling given Harry’s
					birthright and supposed destiny. Obviously, Harry has been predestined
					to destroy the Dark Arts, and his natural affinity for the practice
					will only help Harry when he finally faces Voldemort.

