After Louis leaves, Clarissa chats with her daughter,
					Julia. Both women feel sorry for Louis, but Clarissa thinks to herself
					that she wishes she could be as unencumbered and lonely as he. Clarissa hugs
					Julia but feels awkward and uncomfortable around her. Julia tells
					her mother that she has just stopped by the apartment to pick up
					a backpack and that her friend Mary Krull is waiting outside so that
					they can go shopping for boots. Clarissa tells Julia to bring Mary
					inside, and Julia goes downstairs and tells Mary she would like
					her to get to know her mother better. 

Clarissa and Mary make awkward small talk. Mary is a lesbian activist
					who believes Clarissa is deluded for thinking that the world hates
					her less for trying to assimilate into a heterosexual ideal of domesticity.
					Clarissa feels similarly strange around Mary and disapproves of
					Mary’s belief that being loud and outspoken is somehow virtuous.
					Before Julia and Mary leave, Clarissa reminds Julia about the party
					for Richard that night. As they walk out, Mary thinks about how
					in love with Julia she is and how her love will never be reciprocated. 

As night falls, Virginia stands at the window feeling
					unhappy. The headache seems to be returning, but she tries to convince
					herself that she won’t have a relapse. She decides to take a walk
					and passes the dead thrush in its grave in the garden. The bird’s
					body looks smaller now that it is dead, and Virginia feels sad at
					its lack of dignity. After she exits the garden, she turns toward
					town.

Virginia decides that she wants to go to London and sets
					off for the train station. When she arrives, she discovers that
					she must wait for another twenty minutes for the next train. While
					waiting, she thinks about how worried and angry Leonard will be
					even if she calls him and tells him she’s leaving. She decides to
					call after she has arrived in London so that he won’t be able to
					do anything. She decides to take a walk around the block and bumps
					into Leonard, who has come looking for her. He scolds her for leaving
					the house, but she reassures him that nothing is wrong. As Leonard
					coaxes her to come back to the house, Virginia feels sorry for him
					because he doesn’t know that she meant to disappear—to escape. They
					set off for the house and she tells him that she wants to move back
					to London. He says they should discuss it over dinner.

The character of Mary Krull calls into question the domestic
					life that Clarissa draws comfort from. Inspired by the sour tutor
					Miss Kilman in Mrs. Dalloway, Mary Krull is a social
					activist whose attitudes about her own homosexuality are more defiant
					and political than Clarissa’s. Clarissa has fashioned a comfortable
					life for herself based on the traditional family structures she
					feels most comfortable with. Though some might consider her relationships
					with Richard and Sally to be unusual, Clarissa finds solace in the
					familial relationships she has established, even as she has sometimes
					questioned whether they provide her the fulfillment she desires. 

Mary believes that Clarissa deludes herself into thinking
					her middle-class, domestic lifestyle somehow exempts her from being
					an outsider in society. In contrast, Clarissa feels that Mary Krull
					defines herself by her rage and her extremism and refuses to find
					joy in the simple pleasures of life. In the midst of this tension,
					the two women both feel deep love and affection for Julia, even
					though both Mary and Clarissa feel that the other is leading Julia
					astray. Mary’s thoughts call attention to the doubts that Clarissa
					has expressed about the choices that she has made and the ways she
					has sought to make a life for herself in the face of societal disapproval. 

Virginia feels trapped in Richmond and wants to escape
					back to the energy of London. As she teeters on the brink of relapsing
					madness, she impulsively leaves the house. The decision is extremely impractical,
					as it is unclear what she will do or where she will go once she
					gets to the city. Her actions come out of a desperate attempt to
					feel free from the prospect of experiencing the headaches again. She
					wants to literally escape from the demons that haunt her and feels
					that her only way out is to go back to London. 

Virginia’s impulse to escape Richmond starts to fade after
					she arrives at the train station, and Leonard’s arrival means that
					she won’t be going anywhere. Though touched by his concern, she
					feels sad that he doesn’t realize the degree to which she feels
					tormented by madness and how much she wants to return to the city.
					The scene echoes the events of the prologue, in which Leonard chases
					after Virginia but finds her too late. Here in the train station,
					the first indications of Virginia’s desire to physically escape
					her own life become apparent. While in this instance she simply
					wants to depart from the suburbs and head to the city, later she
					will want to depart from her life altogether.

