Sally sits at lunch with her friends Oliver St. Ives and
					Walter Hardy in Oliver’s apartment. Oliver discusses a film project
					he plans to pitch, a thriller in which the hero is gay, and explains
					that he wants Walter to write the script. He asks for Sally’s advice—and
					though she thinks the film could never work, she keeps her thoughts
					to herself. The magnitude of Oliver’s charisma and star power makes
					her feel that any contrary opinion would be out of place. Instead
					of talking, she looks around her apartment and thinks about the
					macho flamboyance of the decor. 

After they finish lunch, Walter and Sally chat outside.
					Walter asks how Richard is feeling, and Sally suddenly resents Walter
					for being so healthy when Richard is so sick. As they walk to the
					subway, they pass a clothing boutique with beautiful shirts in the
					window. Walter stops in to buy a gift for his lover, Evan, and Sally
					thinks about how she has never had an easy time buying presents
					for Clarissa. A sudden wave of deep affection for Clarissa grips
					her, and she thinks about how sad she would be to lose her. She
					stops by a corner deli and picks up a bouquet of yellow roses for
					Clarissa. 

Laura drives back to pick up Richie after she finishes
					half of the book and checks out of the hotel. She seesaws back and
					forth between her world and the world of Mrs. Dalloway.
					When she reaches Mrs. Hatch’s house, she stands outside for a moment
					before going in. She thinks that she is nothing, that she is hovering
					in a sense of nothingness and craves death. She contemplates driving away
					but forces herself to go in. Richie runs toward Laura and starts crying.
					After comforting Richie, Laura puts him in the car and they drive
					home. In the car, Richie tells Laura in a strange, self-conscious tone
					of voice that he loves her. She tells him that she loves him too and
					asks what’s wrong. She realizes that he senses that something is wrong
					and that she’s been acting strangely. Since Richie watches her so
					observantly, Laura knows that he will be aware of everything she does. 

Clarissa goes to Richard’s apartment to help him get ready
					for the party. He doesn’t answer when she knocks, so she goes right
					in. All of the windows are open and Clarissa is shocked at how bright
					the apartment looks. When she finds Richard, he sits straddling
					the windowsill. She asks him to come down, and he tells her he cannot
					go to the party. He feels choked by his disease and asks Clarissa
					to call his mother. As he rants, he asks her to tell him a story
					about her day and she recounts her trip to buy flowers. He reminds
					her about the time in Wellfleet when she walked sleepily out of
					a glass door in the early morning and how he thought it was the
					most beautiful thing he had ever seen. He says that he thinks he’s
					failed in his work by never creating anything that beautiful. 

After he tells Clarissa he loves her, Richard falls backward
					out of the window. Clarissa tears down the stairs after him and
					approaches Richard’s still body on the ground. As she kneels by
					his body, she puts his hand on his shoulder and pulls his robe from
					his face to reveal his head injury. Unsure of what to do, she waits
					with Richard for a while. If he were alive, she thinks about how
					she would tell him how courageous he’s been to love for so long,
					to try to create so long. She would apologize to him for wanting
					such an ordinary life and for wanting him to come to her party and
					talk to her guests.

Though Sally loves Clarissa, she has trouble understanding
					her. This chapter is the first time we see inside the head of one
					of the partners of the main characters. Although Leonard, Dan, and
					Sally care for Virginia, Laura, and Clarissa, respectively, they
					seem unable to truly understand the three women. Her interactions
					with Oliver and Walter show that Sally often keeps her thoughts
					to herself and avoids confrontation. She realizes that she doesn’t
					fully understand Clarissa’s needs and always seems to buy her the
					wrong kind of gift. While Walter has no trouble selecting a shirt
					for Evan, no matter how ridiculous the shirt is, Sally feels frustrated
					by the fact that she cannot figure out what Clarissa truly wants.
					At the end of the chapter, her spontaneous selection of yellow roses
					from the corner deli shows that she does love Clarissa and wants
					to show the depth of her devotion. 

Laura realizes that Richie watches her constantly and
					she is not as alone as she thought she was. She has felt detached
					and alienated from her husband and son. Dan doesn’t understand who
					she is, and Richie seems too young to have any insight into her
					thoughts and feelings. Richie has always been a blank slate, just
					a child who is present all the time but can’t offer a peer’s understanding
					or insight. When she comes to the realization that he can always
					see her and understand her, she feels shocked and surprised. She
					cannot come to terms with her interconnectedness with her family
					and her debt to Richie. She feels overwhelmed by the idea that her
					family could sense her reticence and confusion about her role as
					a mother and wife. 

After all of Clarissa’s reflections about the importance
					of hanging onto life, her best friend commits suicide before her
					eyes. Richard’s desire to leave the simple joys of life behind challenges
					Clarissa’s ideas about the sanctity of life and love. Perhaps Clarissa
					celebrates life because she has not had to face Richard’s illness
					and the demons that come with it. When she stays with Richard’s
					body for a time, she feels guilty for trying to force Richard to
					fit into her happy life. She cannot tell if she only wanted him
					to be happy so that she could be happy and questions whether she
					was a selfish friend. 

