Maya’s older brother by one year, Bailey is the most important
				person in Maya’s life throughout her childhood. When moved around from
				place to place, Bailey and Maya depend on each other to achieve
				some semblance of stability and continuity in their lives. Unlike
				Maya, Bailey is graceful, attractive, outgoing, and charming, and
				many consider him the jewel of his family. Bailey uses his skills and
				status to protect Maya. With his charms, he defends her against criticism
				and insults. Bailey and Maya share not just in tragedies but also
				in private jokes and a love of language and poetry.

	One of the most striking differences between Maya and
				Bailey is their ability to confront racism. Bailey explains to Maya
				early on that when he senses the negative effects of racism, he
				essentially puts his soul to sleep so that he can forget the incident.
				Maya, however, learns to resist racism actively. Bailey and Maya
				grow further apart as they go through adolescence, and Bailey continues
				to withdraw deeper into himself. Even so, Maya continues
				to confide in him, asking for advice about her pregnancy. He continues
				to show his love for her as well, replying quickly to his sister
				and giving caring advice.

	The return to Stamps from St. Louis traumatizes Bailey,
				and though he never blames his sister, he remains tormented by his
				longing for his mother. He expresses his longing through moodiness,
				sarcasm, and a bold assertion of his independence. In Stamps, he
				finds outlets for his longing for maternal affection by watching
				the white movie star who looks like Vivian and by playing “Momma
				and Papa” with Joyce, his buxom girlfriend who is four years his
				senior. In San Francisco, Bailey tries to win his mother’s approval
				by imitating the people she befriends—he becomes the pimp-like boyfriend of
				a white prostitute. Bailey moves out at age sixteen and gets a job on
				the Southern Pacific Railroad, explaining that he and Vivian have
				come to an understanding with each other and that he has grown wise
				beyond his years.

