The title character and protagonist. Percy is a twelve-year-old demigod and the son of Poseidon and Sally Jackson. He is a troubled yet brave young boy with dyslexia and ADHD who often feels isolated from his peers.

Read an in-depth analysis of Percy Jackson.

A satyr and keeper in charge of protecting Percy in order to obtain his searcher license to find Pan. Initially introduced as Percy’s anxious friend from school, Grover ultimately reveals his true identity and joins Percy on his quest to save the world.

Read an in-depth analysis of Grover Underwood.

A friend of Percy’s, and daughter of Athena. She is a driven, wise, and brave girl who embarks on Percy’s quest to save the world.

Read an in-depth analysis of Annabeth Chase.

The son of Hermes. Luke resides at Camp Half-Blood as a cabin counselor and sword-fighting trainer. He is the antagonist of the story.

Read an in-depth analysis of Luke.

A strong and compassionate mother to Percy, despite the hardships she faced growing up. She once aspired to be a novelist but put that dream on hold to take care of her uncle. Once her uncle died, she was left with no money, family, or diploma. She took night classes to complete her high school degree and worked odd jobs while raising Percy on her own. 

A centaur in charge of activities at Camp Half-Blood. Initially introduced as a middle-aged man in an electric wheelchair and Percy’s favorite teacher.

The god of the sea and one of the Big Three gods. Percy’s biological father. 

The god of the sky and one of the Big Three gods. He defeated his own father, Kronos, by feeding him a mixture of mustard and wine, which made Kronos expel his other children. 

The god of the Underworld and one of the Big Three gods. He is described as greedy, heartless, and deceitful. 

The god of war and father to Clarisse. Ares is Aphrodite’s boyfriend. He is arrogant, strong, clever, and skilled at deception. 

A titan who ate his children because he did not trust them. The gods won a big fight against Kronos by slicing him into pieces with his own scythe and scattering his remains in Tartarus, the darkest part of the Underworld.

The mean and tough math teacher who has it out for Percy. She transforms into a monster called a Fury and attacks Percy.

A courageous and selfless young girl who was the daughter of Zeus. Hades tormented her by releasing a monster from Tartarus. She is remembered at Half-Blood Hill because her spirit remains there in a tree.

Sally Jackson’s husband, and stepfather to Percy. Also called Smelly Gabe, he is lazy and abusive. He spends his time sitting at home, collecting paychecks, and spending money on cigars and beer. 

The pen/sword that was given to Percy by Chiron, also known as Anaklusmos. Chiron tells Percy that it is a gift from Poseidon and that he has been keeping it safe for him. It can only be used against monsters and will not hurt mortals. 

The three frail, ancient-looking women with silver hair tied back in white bandanas who knit giant socks before the middle one cuts the yarn, which signifies death.

A terrifying monster who is half bull and half man, and Pasiphae’s son. His sight and hearing are terrible, so he scopes out his victims through smell. Once charging, however, he cannot change directions easily. 

The three worst monsters from the Underworld. These monstrous creatures possess talons, large leathery bat wings, claws, and mouths full of yellow fangs. They act as Hades’s torturers.

The goddess of wisdom and battle, and mother to Annabeth. She has a rivalry with Poseidon that Annabeth thinks she needs to emulate with Percy.  

The goddess of love. She is married to Hephaestus but is dating Ares. 

A blacksmith who became disabled after Zeus threw him off Mount Olympus. He is clever and talented; however, it does not seem to be enough for his wife, Aphrodite.

The spirit of the sea who guides Percy on his quest to save the world.

A monster initially disguised as a friendly Middle Eastern woman. Athena punished Aunty Em by transforming her into a hideous monster. Medusa turns victims to stone when they look her in the eye. 

A monstrous creature who presents herself as a large woman with a pet Chihuahua. She reveals herself as the Mother of Monsters and transforms into half woman, half snake. 

A monstrous creature disguised as a Chihuahua who transforms into a fire-breathing lion-serpent hybrid. He is the son of Echidna. 

A monster called the Stretcher who initially appears as a mattress salesman. 

The Underworld security guard who feels underpaid and undervalued. 

A three-headed Rottweiler guarding the entrance to the Underworld.

The daughter of Ares who bullies Percy at Camp Half-Blood.

The camp director for Camp Half-Blood and the god of wine. 

A kleptomaniac classmate who bullies Percy and his friends at Yancy Academy. She is favored by the math teacher, Mrs. Dodds. 

Luke’s father and the god of travelers and thieves.

A mortal who abandoned Annabeth as a child but restored their relationship after sending her a letter to apologize. The two briefly reunite, but then Annabeth joins Camp Half-Blood after multiple arguments with her father and her stepfamily.

