A foil for Mademoiselle Reisz, Adèle is a devoted wife
and mother, the epitome of nineteenth-century womanhood. Adèle spends
her days caring for her children, performing her domestic duties,
and ensuring the happiness of her husband. Ironically, while Adèle
is comfortable and happy with her simple, conformist existence,
she unintentionally catalyzes Edna’s movement away from such a lifestyle
with her manner of speech: because she and her fellow Creole women
are so clearly chaste and irreproachably moral, society allows them
to speak openly on such matters as pregnancy, undergarments, and
romantic gossip. Adèle’s conversation reminds Edna of the romantic
dreams and fantasies of her youth, and Edna gradually begins to
uncover the desires that had been suppressed for so many years.
Although Adèle’s behavior represents that which is expected of Edna,
the effect of her words proves more powerful than her example.

Adèle is a static character—she shows no change or growth
from the beginning of the novel to its end. She is also somewhat
simple: when Edna reveals to Adèle that she would give up her money
and her life for her children but not herself, Adèle cannot understand what
more one could give than one’s own life. Edna’s understanding of
an inner, autonomous spirit defies the belief of the time that women
were simply the property of their husbands, who served a specific
role as wives and mothers and devoted themselves solely to those
around them at their own expense. Later in the novel, it is apparent
that Adèle still views a woman’s life in terms of the service she
performs for her family and society. When she suspects Edna of having
an affair with Alcée Arobin she reminds Edna of her duty to her
children. Having just given birth to another child, Adèle still
represents the ideal Victorian woman, whereas Edna ignores her responsibilities
to husband and children, seeking freedom up until, or perhaps even
through, her death.

Take the Analysis of Major Characters Quick Quiz 

