The next morning, Daphne tries to talk to Simon about the night before, but Simon reminds her that he never intended to marry anyone and was willing to die in a duel in order to avoid marrying her and having children. When Daphne blames him for lying to her, he claims that in his mind he truly cannot have children, so his claim was, in fact, not a lie. For the rest of the day, Simon feels guilty that Daphne feels betrayed, but he remains confident that he didn’t deceive her. Simon decides to discuss the issue with Daphne again and goes to their bedroom, only to find it empty. He asks a maid where Daphne is, and she tells him that Daphne has moved bedrooms. Simon finds Daphne’s bedroom and bangs on the door until she answers. Daphne tells Simon that by refusing to have children just to spite his father, he is letting his life be ruled by a dead man. Simon protests that her reasoning is all wrong and leaves.

Upset by his fight with Daphne, Simon proceeds tot a local pub where he gets drunk. On his way back to Clyvedon, he decides that he will try to get back in Daphne’s good graces. He stumbles to her bedroom door, and Daphne lets him in and tries to help him into bed. Simon drunkenly mumbles that his father always got what he wanted, which is why Simon wants to deprive him of an heir who will carry on the family name and title. As Simon gets into bed, he pleads with Daphne not to leave him like everyone else in his life has, and Daphne promises to stay. They sleep for a bit, but then wake up and start having sex. As Simon nears orgasm, Daphne holds him down so that he cannot withdraw when he ejaculates. Simon is so upset that he stutters when he tries to talk. He storms out of the room, and hours later Daphne finds a note saying that Simon has gone to another one of his properties. He tells Daphne to keep him apprised of whether she was successful in conceiving a child. Daphne knew that Simon was angry but is shocked that he actually left her. Daphne prays that she will have a child, as she may not get another chance.

These chapters reveal an important theme: dwelling on the past gives it undue power. When Daphne confronts Simon, accusing him of being a selfish liar, Simon’s past proves to hold power over Daphne as well. Simon, however, believes he’s doing the right thing, insisting he never lied to her because his soul won’t let him have children. Daphne realizes that Simon’s hatred for his father surpasses his potential love for her; despite being dead, Simon’s father rules both of their lives. However, Simon needs to be seen as fully separate from his father, going so far as to blow up at the maid in response to her assumption that he and Daphne would occupy different rooms shows. He’s furious when Daphne points out how inextricably Simon and his father remain linked—that he owns his father’s title, that he thinks of his father each time they finish having sex, and that his father’s will impacts his own to this day. As Simon engages in drunken brawls with sailors at the pub, he pictures striking his father—imagery that reinforces the idea that he’s battling his past, lashing out at the man who rejected him, and giving power to things that cannot be changed.

This section examines the traditional roles of husband and wife and the ways in which those roles are challenged. Simon’s belief that he should have access to his wife whenever he pleases indicates that wives are viewed as objects of ownership. Ironically, Daphne pushes back and displays her own power by moving into a separate bedroom, as a wife traditionally would, though in this case it’s not what Simon desires. When she refuses to open the door to Simon, his shock suggests that a wife’s refusal to obey her husband is unthinkable. As Simon’s rage grows, his assertion that he owns Daphne is a reminder of her subordinate position. Daphne, however, isn’t afraid to assert herself. The role reversal takes a dark turn when Simon returns drunk and she overpowers him, seduces him, and forces him to finish inside her. While she revels in her power, thinking she has the strength to overcome Simon’s past and change his vow, she leaves him feeling powerless. Daphne has now assumed an aggressive role traditionally reserved for men—in this case, specifically the least honorable of men—in society. Though Daphne’s willingness to exceed the trappings of society’s traditional roles is often a strength, here the role reversal reveals her to be selfish and manipulative.

