Frédéric travels back to Paris, feeling satisfied with
					his life. When he arrives, he goes immediately to find Madame Arnoux,
					but Arnoux’s shop is closed up. He tries to find the couple at home,
					but he is told they no longer live there. Frédéric inquires at several
					shops as well as the police station, but to no avail.

He decides to find Regimbart, certain he’ll know where
					the Arnouxes live now. He visits all the cafes where he knows Regimbart
					is a regular, but everyone evades his questions and it seems Frédéric
					has always just missed him. He eventually finds him, and Regimbart
					reveals the Arnouxes’ new address.

Frédéric finally finds the Arnouxes. But when he sees
					Madame Arnoux, he is surprised by how little he feels. Arnoux explains
					that he is no longer an art dealer—he is now a pottery dealer. Once Frédéric
					leaves, he vows not to think of Madame Arnoux anymore.

Frédéric seeks out Deslauriers, who has failed his exams
					and is now struggling to get by. Deslauriers is excited about Frédéric’s newfound
					fortune, but Frédéric feels reluctant to share it so readily. Deslauriers
					reveals that Hussonnet now owns Arnoux’s old art magazine and is
					planning to turn it into a political journal. As they spend more
					time together, Frédéric warms to Deslauriers once again.

Frédéric buys new clothes and plans to visit the Dambreuses. Instead,
					he calls on Arnoux. Madame Arnoux is ill, but Arnoux invites him
					to a party at the home of Mademoiselle Rose-Annette Bron, called
					Rosanette. Frédéric is surprised by the number of people there,
					and he feels uneasy at the merriment, knowing that Madame Arnoux
					is at home. But he tries to pull himself together. He runs into
					Hussonnet and Pellerin, who point out various notable people at
					the party. Rosanette is engaged in conversation with an actor named
					Delmar. She also talks to an old man named Monsieur Oudry. Eventually,
					Mademoiselle Vatnaz appears, and she talks to Arnoux. They disappear
					together briefly, and Frédéric sees Rosanette crying. One woman,
					whom Flaubert refers to as “The Sphinx,” coughs up blood, and Frédéric
					is overcome with sadness.

The guests begin breaking china over their heads, and
					Arnoux remarks cryptically that he expects payment, which suggests
					that he had been Rosanette’s lover but isn’t anymore. Champagne
					is served; birds from the aviary escape and fly around the room.
					When morning comes, guests start to leave. Arnoux and Frédéric leave
					together. Frédéric feels the desire for a more luxurious life.

Frédéric buys a home. He considers asking Deslauriers
					to live with him but decides he needs to live alone so that he can
					be ready to have a mistress. He overspends but does not worry. He
					writes to Madame Dambreuse requesting permission to visit, which
					she grants.

Frédéric is overcome by the luxuriousness of the Dambreuses’ home.
					However, the talk among the people who are gathered there is trivial
					and annoying. Frédéric is impressed by Madame Dambreuse’s appearance
					and behavior, and she invites him to return every Wednesday.

Frédéric visits Rosanette, who tells him she will be dining
					out that evening. Her hairdresser arrives, and she tells him she
					is staying at home. The conversation among her and her servants
					bothers Frédéric; it reminds him of the idle talk at the Dambreuses’
					home. Mademoiselle Vatnaz arrives, and Frédéric loans her some change. Rosanette
					tells Mlle. Vatnaz that she will be going to Alphonsine’s tonight.
					Frédéric is confused by her changes in story. She asks him to tell
					Arnoux to visit her. Frédéric believes Rosanette will become his mistress
					one day, then he immediately thinks of Madame Arnoux.

When he next visits Madame Arnoux, she is sewing. She
					asks him questions about his background and career plans and holds
					out her hand to him before he leaves. Frédéric feels like this is
					a promise of some kind.

Frédéric wants to have a housewarming party, and he invites Hussonnet,
					Pellerin, Deslauriers, Senecal, Cisy, and Dussardier. Senecal has
					lost his teaching job because of his political views, and he no
					longer lives with Deslauriers. The men discuss politics; Senecal
					is referred to as the Socialist. Pellerin hints at a scandal Arnoux
					is embroiled in, involving a lawsuit about some land. They insult
					various aspects of Frédéric’s home, asking him why he has chosen
					to decorate as he did and why he doesn’t have certain books. Frédéric gives
					Deslauriers some money to repay a debt, and Deslauriers asks for
					more to help support Hussonnet’s newspaper, which Frédéric refuses.

When the men leave Frédéric’s, they decide that Frédéric
					had been a perfect host, but they idly criticize the lunch and the
					décor. Frédéric, alone now, feels distant from his friends. He wonders
					if Arnoux is actually in trouble and if Madame Arnoux is okay. He visits
					her and tries to find out what’s going on; Arnoux is indeed in some
					financial trouble from borrowing against his land. Frédéric promises
					Madame Arnoux to help if he can, reassuring her that her problems
					are temporary.

Arnoux enters the room and announces he is going to visit Oudry.
					Frédéric figures out that Oudry keeps Rosanette. Arnoux begins inviting
					Frédéric to Rosanette’s house regularly. Frédéric likes Rosanette’s
					energy and excitement, which is much different from the calmness
					surrounding Madame Arnoux.

Arnoux does his best to juggle his wife and his mistress.
					But Rosanette tires of his antics and complains to Frédéric that
					Arnoux never bought her a cashmere shawl he’d promised her. She
					also tells Frédéric that Arnoux had forced her to sign a bill made
					out to Monsieur Dambreuse.

Frédéric tries to write, but he grows depressed at his
					unrequited love of Madame Arnoux. He decides to get Arnoux to hire
					Senecal, so Senecal can operate as a kind of spy. Arnoux, who is
					trying to build up his new factory, hires him. Frédéric begins championing Rosanette
					to Arnoux, trying to get him to spend more time with her so that
					Frédéric can spend more time with Madame Arnoux. Arnoux finally
					buys Rosanette the cashmere shawl. When Frédéric visits her, he
					suspects she is making advances, and he decides to try to make Rosanette
					his mistress. She rebuffs him.

Frédéric asks Pellerin to paint a portrait of Rosanette,
					and they spend more time together. But still she resists him.

Hussonnet and Deslauriers visit him at home and talk about
					their paper. Frédéric relents and gives them some money. Deslauriers complains
					that Frédéric has not introduced him to society, but Frédéric knows
					Deslauriers is much too shabby.

Frédéric pursues a career in the Council of State, with
					Dambreuse’s help. Rosanette ends her relationship with Oudry and makes
					what Frédéric interprets as an invitation to take his place. At her
					next party, Frédéric wanders from group to group listening to the
					conversations and looking at all the women. Dambreuse hints that
					he may be willing to get Frédéric a job in business. Filled with confidence,
					he tries to visit Rosanette the next evening, but she turns him
					away. Mademoiselle Vatnaz sees him go and complains that Delmar
					is with her. She tells him secrets about Rosanette’s romantic and
					sexual history.

Frédéric visits the Arnouxes, who are in the middle of
					an argument. Madame Arnoux is accusing Arnoux of having an affair—she learned
					of his purchase of the shawl. Arnoux leaves, and Frédéric tries
					to comfort her. He feels connected to her. When Arnoux returns,
					he reassures him, too, that everything will be okay.

Flaubert does not always fully explain the nature of the
					friendships and romantic relationships surrounding Frédéric, and
					this vagueness emphasizes that Frédéric is still an outsider in
					this world of high society. When Arnoux takes him to a party at
					Rosanette, Frédéric finds himself in a world of confusing liaisons.
					He meets Rosanette, Oudry, and Delmar; he once again sees Mademoiselle
					Vatnaz; hints are made about Arnoux’s involvement with Rosanette;
					and Rosanette, for some reason, winds up in tears. Although these
					relationships become clearer as the novel progresses, Frédéric’s
					first exposure to them is convoluted, secretive, and fraught. He
					does his best to keep up, but he is just as confused as we are about
					who’s sleeping with whom, who knows what, and what his position
					actually is in all this. He is an outsider, but as he learns more,
					he gains a certain privilege from his outsider status, as people
					feel safe telling him their secrets.

Madame Arnoux and Rosanette, Frédéric’s two romantic obsessions,
					are vastly different types of women. Madame Arnoux is almost always
					portrayed in a warm, domestic setting. She is often sitting by a
					fire when Frédéric arrives, she is nearly always sewing, and she
					frequently has a child in her lap. Frédéric thinks her movements
					have a peaceful grace. This image of a comfortable, calm, matronly
					woman contrasts with the fiery Rosanette, who, far from engaging
					in family life, throws parties and acts with a wildness that stuns
					and excites Frédéric. The two women are almost complete opposites,
					but both Arnoux and Frédéric are attracted to them both. Each woman
					seems to fulfill a different need: Madame Arnoux satisfies the desire
					for safety and comfort, while Rosanette satisfies more primal, sexual
					desires. Arnoux, more worldly than Frédéric, surely understands
					the attraction of his mistress. But Frédéric seems to copy Arnoux’s
					affections without much or any critical thought about why each woman
					is remarkable or why each is appealing.

The role of art changes significantly for Arnoux, Hussonnet,
					Pellerin, and Frédéric. Arnoux gives up his art dealership for the
					pottery trade, which sets him on a different, perhaps scandalous
					or ruinous course. He tells Frédéric that great art is no longer
					fashionable and claims that his factory itself is a form of beauty.
					Arnoux’s art magazine, meanwhile, has been appropriated by Hussonnet
					to use for political purposes. Pellerin embraces his painting, but
					he has given up on beauty and focuses instead on variety. The idea
					of pure beauty is no longer a consideration. Frédéric exploits Pellerin’s
					artistic talents for his own agenda, employing him to paint Rosanette’s portrait
					so he can spend more time with her. Here, too, beauty is not the
					purpose of this artistic endeavor; the art is being used toward some
					other goal. As Frédéric becomes more involved in society and pursues
					various women, career paths, and connections, the role of art gets
					muddled and bastardized, just as his own values and beliefs fade
					as he tries to become more like his new acquaintances.

