The eldest daughter of Larry and Ann Cook, wife of Tyler Smith, and protagonist and narrator of the novel. At first, Ginny is quiet and timid, but she changes dramatically as the novel proceeds.

Read an in-depth analysis of Ginny.

Middle daughter of Larry and Ann Cook, wife of Peter Lewis, and mother to Pammy and Linda. Rose has had a double mastectomy to treat breast cancer. She is stubborn and outspoken. Her anger fuels much of the novel’s action.

Read an in-depth analysis of Rose.

The youngest daughter of Larry and Ann Cook, the only sister who leaves home. Caroline becomes a lawyer and marries another lawyer, Frank Rasmussen. They live in Des Moines.

Read an in-depth analysis of Caroline.

Widowed father of Ginny, Rose, and Caroline. Larry is a cunning, successful farmer who owns a thousand acres of prime land. His decision to deed his farm to his daughters initiates the action of the novel.

Read an in-depth analysis of Larry.

Son of Harold Cook and lover to both Ginny and Rose. When the novel begins, Jess has been gone for thirteen years, traveling the world, learning about organic farming and Eastern philosophy, and avoiding the Vietnam War. Jess is handsome and intelligent, but he’s also indecisive and noncommittal.

Read an in-depth analysis of Jess.

Husband to Rose. Pete is a talented musician who took up farming but never quite fits into the family. He is gregarious, entertaining, and fun. Like Larry, he is a drinker and can become violent when he drinks.

Husband to Ginny and a talented, ambitious, hard-working farmer. Ty is quiet and peaceful, mostly content to keep the farm going and be patient with the family. He is loyal to Larry and critical of Ginny and Rose when they challenge their father.

A neighboring farmer, father to Loren and Jess. Jess believes that Harold deliberately cultivates ridicule, but he is actually a cunning and shrewd businessman. Harold buys an International Harvester tractor that makes Larry jealous but takes Larry’s side in public.

Brother of Jess and son of Harold. Large, gentle, and kind, Loren has never married and helps work his father’s farm.

The community banker who arranges the paperwork when Larry decides to give his farm to his daughters. Marv believes in avoiding toxins, so he is a finicky eater.

Rose and Pete’s sensitive older daughter. Pammy takes after her mother.

Rose and Pete’s daughter, a year younger than her sister Pammy. Linda is more carefree than her sister.

Larry’s wife and the mother of Ginny, Rose, and Caroline. Ann dies before the novel begins, but her presence is still felt by her family. According to Mary Livingston, she feared for her daughters’ safety from their father.

Caroline’s husband, also a lawyer.

Father to Edith and the Cook girls’ great-grandfather. With his wife, Sam was the original owner of the land that Larry Cook’s farm now occupies.

Mother to Edith and the Cook girls’ great-grandmother. With her husband, Arabella was the original owner of the land that Larry Cook’s farm now occupies.

The girls’ grandmother, mother to Larry, daughter of Sam and Arabella Davis, and wife of John Cook.

The girls’ grandfather, father to Larry, and husband to Edith Davis. John was co-founder of the Cook farm and built the drainage system that saved the land.

A sociable neighboring farmer with whom Larry does not get along. Stanley buys the Livingstons’ farm. He kills himself when he loses his farm.

The minister of the family’s church early in the narrative.

The pastor of the family’s Lutheran church whom Ginny visits for counsel.

A couple who own land near Larry but who sell it and move away. They farm differently—more playfully, with more pleasure and fun. Ginny and Ty live in the house the Ericsons used to own.

The lawyer who handles the legality of the farm transfer.

A woman who was once friends with Ann Cook and knew her well when she was dying. Mary tells Ginny how her mother worried for her daughters’ safety living with their father after her death.

A lawyer in Mason City who represents the two couples in the lawsuit with Larry and Caroline.

The judge who presides at the hearing about the farm’s management.

