Ella invites the preacher from the local black church
over for a dinner of fried chicken. Richard is very excited about
the relatively fancy meal, but Ella will not let Richard eat any
of the chicken until he finishes his soup, which he is unable to
do in his excitement for the meat. Increasingly distressed as he
watches the preacher devour piece after piece of the precious chicken,
Richard eventually runs out of the room, screaming that the preacher
is going to eat everything. The preacher laughs, but Ella does not
find Richard’s dramatic actions amusing, and forbids him any more
dinner.

	Ella sues Nathan for child support, but Nathan successfully
convinces the judge that he is already giving all the support he
can. Richard notes that he does not hate his father but merely prefers
not to see him or think of him at all. For this reason, Richard
refuses his mother’s requests that he go to his father’s job and
beg him for money.

Poverty forces Ella to place Richard and his brother in
an orphanage for a month, where they eat two miserable meals per
day and tend the lawn, pulling grass by hand. The orphanage director, Miss
Simon, apparently takes a liking to Richard and asks him to help
her blot envelopes in her office. Once in Miss Simon’s office, however,
Richard is paralyzed with an inexplicable fear and is unable to
do anything she asks of him. Frustrated, Miss Simon drives Richard
from her office. He decides to run away from the orphanage that
night, and when he does so he gets lost. Richard encounters a white
policeman, but he remembers the story of the white man beating the
black boy and fears that the policeman will beat him. The policeman
is friendly, however, and brings Richard back to the orphanage.
Miss Simon promptly lashes Richard for running away.

	Ella decides that the family should go to her sister
Maggie’s home in Elaine, Arkansas. She takes Richard out of the
orphanage so that he can go to Nathan and plead for the money the
family needs to make the journey. Predictably, Nathan claims that
he has no money to give, and he seems amused by the idea that his
children are going hungry. A slight altercation ensues, and Richard
and his mother say harsh words to the irritatingly jolly Nathan
and his mistress. Nathan then offers Richard a nickel, and though
the boy wants to accept it, he refuses.

	Richard muses that this meeting is the last time he would
see his father for twenty-five years. When he next sees Nathan,
the old man is nothing more than a poor, toothless sharecropper.
Richard feels nothing but pity for Nathan as an old man, reflecting
that whereas Nathan failed in his attempt to find a successful life
in the city, Richard himself has done much better, and created a
dramatically new life out of his humble origins.

Though it is essentially autobiographical, at times Black
Boy does not resemble a conventional autobiography. Immediately
following Richard’s description of his almost-fatal illness, for
example, Wright includes a lengthy passage of lyrical prose that
details his sentimental responses to the natural environment. Phrases
such as “the tantalizing melancholy in the tingling scent of burning
hickory wood” and “the aching glory in masses of clouds burning
gold and purple from an invisible sun” shift the focus of the narrative
away from concrete facts and toward more nebulous depictions of
Richard’s imaginative mind. These phrases give human qualities to inanimate
matter and contain highly subjective feelings that we typically
associate with fiction and poetry. Because it contains such purely
artistic passages in addition to concrete biographical information, Black
Boy is often termed an autobiographical novel. Similar
to Maya Angelou’s I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings, Wright’s novel
strikes a creative compromise between fact and fiction—in part because
the author wishes to describe events and ideas deeply embedded in
the memories of early childhood.

