Although Their Eyes Were Watching God revolves
around Janie’s relationships with other people, it is first and
foremost a story of Janie’s search for spiritual enlightenment and
a strong sense of her own identity. When we first and last see Janie,
she is alone. The novel is not the story of her quest for a partner
but rather that of her quest for a secure sense of independence.
Janie’s development along the way can be charted by studying her
use of language and her relationship to her own voice.

At the end of her journey, Janie returns to Eatonville
a strong and proud woman, but at the beginning of her story, she
is unsure of who she is or how she wants to live. When she tells
her story to Pheoby, she begins with her revelation under the blossoming
pear tree—the revelation that initiates her quest. Under the pear
tree, she witnesses a perfect union of harmony within nature. She
knows that she wants to achieve this type of love, a reciprocity
that produces oneness with the world, but is unsure how to proceed.
At this point, she is unable to articulate even to herself exactly
what she wants.

When Jody Starks enters her life, he seems to offer the
ideal alternative to the dull and pragmatic Logan Killicks. With
his ambitious talk, Jody convinces Janie that he will use his thirst
for conquest to help her realize her dreams, whatever they may be.
Janie learns that Jody’s exertion of power only stifles her. But
just before Jody’s death, Janie’s repressed power breaks through
in a torrent of verbal retaliation. Her somewhat cruel tirade at
the dying Jody measures the depth of Jody’s suppression of her inner
life. Having begun to find her voice, Janie blows through social
niceties to express herself.

Janie flourishes in her relationship with Tea Cake, as
he “teaches her the maiden language all over.” Her control of speech
reaches a new level as she learns to be silent when she chooses.
This idea of silence as strength rather than passivity comes to
the forefront during Janie’s trial, when the narrator glosses over
her testimony. Dialogue has been pivotally important up to this
point, and one might expect Hurston to use the courtroom scene to
showcase Janie’s hard-won, mature voice. The absence of dialogue
here, Mary Ellen Washington argues in the foreword present in most
editions of the novel, reflects Hurston’s discomfort with rhetoric
for its own sake; Hurston doesn’t want Janie’s voice to be confused
with that of the lawyer or politician. Janie’s development of her
voice is inseparable from her inner growth, and the drama of the
courtroom may be too contrived to draw out the nuances of her inner
life. Janie summarizes the novel’s attitude toward language when
she tells Pheoby that talking “don’t amount tuh uh hill uh beans”
if it isn’t connected to actual experience.

Take the Analysis of Major Characters Quiz 

