Mortenson, who has obtained an additional $10,000 from Jean Hoerni to build
					the bridge to Korphe, is now back in Pakistan. In spite of his earlier experiences
					with Changazi, Mortenson has hired him to help in obtaining the bridge materials,
					and he feels appreciative of Changazi’s large network of connections. He learns that
					Changazi has many sexual relationships, which are sanctioned as “temporary
					marriages” by some Shiite clerics. When a rockslide stops the trucks carrying the
					bridge cable to Korphe, the men of the village walk to the site and return carrying
					the cable. During this time, Mortenson and Haji’s son, Twaha, discuss their personal
					lives, and Mortenson learns more about the sexual customs in this culture. Although
					Twaha is not married, he sometimes has sex with widows in the village.

The rainy season starts, and they have to wait before pouring concrete for the
					bridge, so Twaha proposes that the men of the village mount a hunting trip. They
					hope to secure an ibex, a large mountain goat that will provide food for the
					village. Mortenson accompanies them, and the difficult trip increases his
					appreciation for the resourcefulness of the Balti people. After a week, the men slay
					an ibex, and Houssein, the most educated man in Korphe, butchers the animal.
					Mortenson thinks that Houssein would be a good teacher for the school. The bridge
					construction begins, and as he is supervising the work, Mortenson is pleased to see
					an American party arrive. One of the men is George McCown, a noted climber and
					wealthy businessman who is immediately drawn to Mortenson. We learn that he will
					become an important supporter of Mortenson’s work, and that McCown’s guide, Faisal
					Baig, will become Mortenson’s bodyguard. As the chapter ends, the bridge is
					completed.

Back in California, Mortenson finds work in an emergency room and lives in a
					very small apartment. But he now feels that he is at least working toward his return
					to Korphe. Marina wants to reconcile, but he realizes she is not the right woman for
					him. He contacts Jean Hoerni and travels to Seattle, where the two finally meet in
					person. Hoerni is enthusiastic about the bridge. George McCown, who is also
					interested in the project, invites Mortenson to attend an American Himalayan
					Foundation dinner. The guest speaker will be Mortenson’s hero, famed climber Sir
					Edmund Hillary. At the dinner, Mortenson is inspired by Hillary’s account of his own
					efforts to build schools and clinics in Nepal. He is also stunned when Hoerni and
					McCown offer to support him financially for a year so he can complete the Korphe
					project. Mortenson is even more excited at meeting Tara Bishop, a psychology
					graduate student and daughter of a noted National Geographic
					photographer. The two feel an immediate attraction and spend the evening talking
					about their lives and interests. Six days later, they marry at the Oakland City
					Hall, and one of Mortenson’s friends, a cable car driver, takes them on a private
					tour of San Francisco. Mortenson postpones his return to Korphe for two weeks to
					spend time with Tara. At the end of the chapter, he boards a plane.

Although the plot in Chapter 10 centers on building the Braldu bridge, the
					narrative largely focuses on developing and introducing characters. Changazi comes
					across even more strongly as a conniving person who may be helpful at times but
					generally cannot be trusted. Twaha, who has previously been shown only as Haji’s son
					and aide, running errands and translating, now emerges as a more fully rounded human
					being. He confides in Mortenson about his occasional trysts with the village widows
					and his plans for the future, as well as advising Mortenson on his own love life.
					Meanwhile, George McCown’s introduction reveals more about the camaraderie among the
					mountain-climbing community. The American Himalayan Foundation gives Mortenson a
					birthday card for McCown to be delivered should Mortenson and McCown cross paths.
					McCown’s arrival in Korphe is also a lucky break for Mortenson. We learn that their
					meeting will lead to new sources of financial support for Mortenson, and also
					personal support, as McCown’s guide, Faisal Baig, will become Mortenson’s bodyguard.
					Mortenson, meanwhile, has largely overcome the problems that brought him to a low
					point both in terms of his personal life and his project of building the school. In
					a very short span of time, most of his personal problems have been resolved. He has
					been transformed from a lonely, intermittently employed nurse to a happily married
					man whose work is admired and supported.

Chapter 10 furthers the bridge-building theme by showing Mortenson’s deepening
					connection with the Balti people and their way of life. During his stay in Korphe
					this time, Mortenson begins to bond with Twaha, and by participating in the ibex
					hunt, Mortenson increases his understanding of the Balti people’s extremely close
					relationship with nature. Many things that happen on the hunt reveal new aspects of
					Balti culture. For example, Mortenson learns about the tomar, which
					is not only a badge of courage used by the hunters but also a talisman of protection
					given to Balti babies. The use of talismans and the prayers before the hunt
					illustrate the more ancient aspects of the Balti culture, including its strong ties
					with Islam. Mortenson also begins to build a relationship with Sakina, Haji’s wife.
					Although it is very unusual for Balti men to go into the kitchen, traditionally
					thought of as the woman’s province, Sakina accepts Mortenson’s occasional visits
					affectionately. This acceptance is one more sign that he is succeeding in his
					attempt to gain the villagers’ trust.

In this section, it occurs to Mortenson for the first time that building a
					school in Korphe might bring problems as well as benefits. As he approaches the
					village in Chapter 10, he realizes that the bridge—specifically the connection it
					will create between Korphe and the outside world—may corrupt the purity he
					appreciates in the villagers and their way of life. Mortenson does not dwell on this
					thought, but the idea presents new insights for the reader. Korphe represents a kind
					of Eden. Because the village is so far away from other influences, the people have
					remained essentially innocent. The isolation and harsh conditions may make life hard
					there at times, but for the most part, the people live happy, meaningful lives.
					Mortenson’s school, however, will bring down some of those barriers with the outside
					world by teaching the students about foreign places and ideas. What the consequences
					could be remains unclear. The tone of the story, however, strongly suggests that
					educating the children is worth whatever minor negative repercussions may
					result.

