James wakes up in front of the TV. He walks back to his
					room. Miles is reading the Bible. Miles thanks him for allowing
					him time to himself the previous night. James offers to help however
					he can. The job board says that James is in the Family Program.
					He goes to breakfast and consumes an awful burrito as if it were
					the last thing on earth. Joanne walks James through the basics of
					the Family Program. The first step is telling his parents everything
					he’s been doing and the extent of it. Daniel, a counselor in the
					Family Program, is with them. James’s parents hug him, but he doesn’t
					hug back. He tells them everything, starting with when he was ten
					years old, including all of the arrests and the charges, and the
					skipping bail. His mother and father both cry. Joanne suggests he
					leave them alone with Daniel.

Back in Joanne’s office she asks how James feels. He tells
					her that he feels as if suicide is the only option, although not
					one he’ll pursue. He says that every time he’s near his parents,
					he gets angry. Joanne asks if he’s ever been abused. James tells
					her that he hasn’t. She asks if James is going to meet Lilly later
					that night, and he admits to it. She urges him to not get involved
					with Lilly. James leaves Joanne’s office and walks to lunch. He
					stares at Lilly and tells himself that she is becoming what he wanted
					the Girl with the Arctic Eyes to become: someone who loves him.

James and his parents greet one another briefly before
					they all go to meetings in which the addicts mingle with other addicts’
					family members. James sits by himself at dinner, and afterward he
					struggles to remain calm. He reads the Tao. Back
					in Joanne’s office, James and his parents talk about how that morning’s
					meeting has affected each of them. James goes first, then his father,
					then his mother, who ends up crying uncontrollably.

James goes to his room in a foul mood and pulls off one
					of his toenails. The pain calms the Fury. Once he’s gotten this
					out of his system, he cleans up and leaves his bedroom. In the lounge,
					he sees someone who is vaguely familiar staring him down. James
					returns to his room and tells Miles about the shame he feels for
					putting his parents in pain. Miles tells him that shame is a necessary
					thing and tells him that he is terrified that his wife, who is arriving
					next week for the Family Program, will not want him back. James
					points him to Leonard and to the Tao.

James goes to meet Lilly. They are about to have sex when
					James tells her that he’s never had sex while sober before. Lilly
					tells James that she promises him that she won’t hurt or leave him.
					James tells her that the last time he tried to have sex was with
					the Girl with the Arctic Eyes and that he couldn’t maintain an erection.
					Lilly tells him about her mother and how her mother sold her into
					prostitution for drugs. Lilly ran away to her grandmother after
					four years of this. At school, she got involved with a crack addict.
					His friends start using her for sex. There is an unnamed terrible
					event, but Lilly won’t speak of it. James holds her as she cries.

The arrival of James’s parents at the facility unhinges
					him. He doesn’t want to see them for obvious reasons: he clearly
					has not told them a whole lot about his life for the past decade
					or so. He also feels uncontrollably angry whenever he sees them.
					Joanne is trying to get him to acknowledge some deep childhood hurt,
					but he can’t even fathom such a thing. As much as James is overwhelmed
					by the Fury when he sees his parents, they are equally overwhelmed
					by a completely different set of emotions: guilt, sadness, confusion,
					and a sense that they’ve been lied to and deceived for many years.

With his parents’ arrival also comes the opening of several
					other previously closed doors. His relationship with Lilly is suddenly
					out in the open, despite James and Lilly’s best efforts to keep
					it under wraps. Miles, a fine, upstanding citizen, reveals himself
					to be no better than James—he is as much an alcoholic and a mess
					as any other criminal in the facility. When James tells his parents
					the story of his addiction, he is in essence giving himself another
					chance at inventory. His first inventory, which occurred against
					the backdrop of his possible suicide, had a self-pitying, melancholy
					tone to it, but James’s rehashing of his life here assumes an extremely
					detached tone, as if he’s merely reciting the facts. In fact, he’s
					struggling to keep the Fury at bay and trying to give his parents
					as much information as he can, since he feels very clearly that
					he’s lied to them for far too long and does not want to continue
					this pattern. We are reminded of James’s capability to throw up
					bravado as a shield, using it as an effective block to feeling anything.
					James also finally tells the full story of the Girl with the Arctic
					Eyes, first to his parents and later to Lilly. Of equal importance
					is the full disclosure to James’s parents. For the first time James
					is forced to hear them and be in a room with them as they all talk
					about their emotions and how they feel toward one other. James is
					finally able to tell his parents how he feels when he is around
					them—that he is angry at them all the time and can hardly stand
					to be around them.

Visiting with his parents has brought James closer to
					the precipice from which he’s only just begun to retreat. The Fury
					comes back each day now, and where, only a short while ago, he could
					find calm in himself simply by focusing on the good things in his
					life, he now must revert to such ghastly acts as ripping off his
					own toenail to make the Fury go away.

This section is a positive turning point for James, however.
					He partakes in the Family Program with none of the cynicism that
					peppers the first half of the book. When the time comes for him
					to hold hands with everyone in the group meeting, he does so without
					a single protest. James also voices out loud how awful it is for
					him finally to be able to see himself as others see him. He says
					that he sees himself as a monster and that he is utterly ashamed
					and embarrassed for his parents.

Lilly’s role in James’s life as a replacement addiction
					is further cemented in this chapter. The two of them are clearly
					feeding each other’s need for another understanding human being.
					James and Lilly advance in their relationship as if they are each
					terribly inexperienced in matters of love. As much as James saw
					the fragility in John, he is now seeing the same in himself—and
					in Lilly.

