One of two main protagonists in the novel (the other being
				Konstantin Levin), Anna is the beautiful, passionate, and educated wife of
				Alexei Karenin, a cold and passionless government official. Her character
				is rich in complexity: she is guilty of desecrating her marriage
				and home, for instance, but she remains noble and admirable nonetheless.
				Anna is intelligent and literate, a reader of English novels and a writer of
				children’s books. She is elegant, always understated in her dress. Her many
				years with Karenin show her capable of playing the role of cultivated,
				beautiful, society wife and hostess with great poise and grace. She is very
				nearly the ideal aristocratic Russian wife of the 1870s.

Among Anna's most prominent qualities are her passionate
				spirit and determination to live life on her own terms. She is a
				feminist heroine of sorts. Though disgraced, she dares to face
				St. Petersburg high society and refuses the exile to which she has been
				condemned, attending the opera when she knows very well she will meet
				with nothing but scorn and derision. Anna is a martyr to the old-fashioned
				Russian patriarchal system and its double standard for male and female
				adultery. Her brother, Stiva, is far looser in his morals but is never
				even chastised for his womanizing, whereas Anna is sentenced to social
				exile and suicide. Moreover, Anna is deeply devoted to her family and
				children, as we see when she sneaks back into her former home to visit
				her son on his birthday. Anna’s refusal to lose Seryozha is the only reason
				she refuses Karenin’s offer of divorce, even though this divorce
				would give her freedom.

The governing principle of Anna’s life is that love is
				stronger than anything, even duty. She remains powerfully committed to
				this principle. She rejects Karenin’s request that she stay with
				him simply to maintain outward appearances of an intact marriage
				and family. In the later stages of her relationship with Vronsky,
				Anna worries most that he no longer loves her but remains with her
				out of duty only. Her exile from civilized society in the later
				part of the novel is a symbolic rejection of all the social conventions
				we normally accept dutifully. She insists on following her heart
				alone. As a result, Anna contrasts with with the ideal of living for God
				and goodness that Levin embraces in the last chapter, and she appears
				self-centered by comparison. Even so, Anna’s insistence on living
				according to the dictates of her heart makes her a pioneer, a woman
				searching for autonomy and passion in a male-dominated society.

