Could it be that the trees of Fangorn
						were awake, and the forest was rising, marching over the hills to
						war?

Speeding through the forest, Merry and Pippin stop to
					drink water from the Entwash River. Munching on some of their few
					remaining lembas cakes, they worry about their
					lack of food and supplies. To their surprise, Merry and Pippin are
					suddenly addressed by what appears to be a fourteen-foot-tall walking
					tree. The creature is an Ent, an ancient treelike creature, named
					Fangorn or Treebeard. He is kind to the hobbits, and he explains
					his history to them. Treebeard identifies himself as one of the
					oldest creatures in Middle-earth. He is the shepherd of the other
					trees in the forest, many of which are Ents like him. Fangorn offers
					to carry Merry and Pippin to his home and to give them food and
					drink. On the way, Fangorn provides information about the Ents and
					their history. Many trees in the forest are simply Ents that have
					fallen asleep, who must be roused to action by some stirring motivation.
					The Ents have lost their wives, as the Ent-wives wandered off one
					day long ago. As a consequence, there are no young Ents in the forest.

As Pippin and Merry are being carried to the Ent-house,
					they ask Fangorn why they have heard stories warning them about
					the Ent forest. Fangorn agrees that it is an odd land, and expresses
					surprise that the hobbits ever made it into the forest in the first
					place. During the hobbits’ meal at the Ent-house, Fangorn gives
					them some Ent food, a nourishing liquid that they drink greedily.
					Pippin and Merry learn about the Ents’ growing fury at the Orcs
					and at Saruman, who has been mutating the Orcs into a new breed
					of monsters unafraid of sunlight (most Orcs fear the sun, and therefore
					come out only at night). Fangorn says that Saruman is evil and that
					Saruman’s Isengard forces must be stopped through an alliance between
					Rohan, the Ents, and Aragorn’s group.

After a night’s sleep, Fangorn takes the hobbits to an
					Entmoot, or gathering of the Ents, in which the tree beings discuss
					a possible alliance with Rohan. The hobbits discover a variety of
					tree creatures of different shapes and sizes assembled. While the
					Ents debate in a low murmur, Merry and Pippin wonder how the Ents
					could possibly move on Isengard, which is a ring of rocky hills
					with a pillar of rock in the middle—not a place that trees could
					reach easily.

Merry and Pippin are invited to the home of an Ent named Bregalad
					or Quickbeam, who explains that the Orcs have been cruel to the
					Ents, cutting down trees for no reason. The hobbits suddenly hear
					the mighty roar of the Ent assembly, which has been stirred to action.
					Pippin at first cannot believe his eyes when he thinks he sees trees
					in motion, but it is true—the forest itself begins to move. The tree
					creatures all march toward Isengard to wage battle with Saruman
					and his Orc forces. Bregalad marches next to Fangorn, who reflects
					that the Ents may be marching to their doom. Fangorn points the
					way on to Isengard.

The introduction of the Ents effectively broadens the
					scope of the battle brewing between the Fellowship’s forces and
					the Enemy, as the natural world itself becomes involved. What is
					taking shape is more than just warfare among the various races and
					peoples of Middle-earth. As Saruman’s Orc armies have begun an assault
					on nature itself, destroying the forest for no reason, nature itself
					fights back. The dramatic scene of the Ents marching into battle
					is a powerful moment, as well as a subtle nod to Shakespeare’s Macbeth, in
					which one of the prophecies relating to Macbeth’s demise is that
					a forest will physically move toward a castle. The episode of the
					Ents, in reminding us that evil in The Lord of the Rings is
					a universal force, touching even the lives of trees, forests, and
					entire landscapes, is an important component of the rich portrayal
					of the natural world that Tolkien has created in the novel. Tolkien
					wrote The Lord of the Rings in the 1940s,
					before the blossoming of the modern environmental conservation movement,
					but he foreshadows this era of ecological concerns in his critical
					portrayal of the evil Orcs’ thoughtless destruction of trees for
					no practical purpose. The tree creatures have been patient for centuries,
					but now that they feel a significant threat to their environment,
					the power of their anger is formidable.

The Ents offer an example of a benevolent element in the
					natural world. Continuing the pattern we have seen in The
						Fellowship of the Ring, nature is rarely just an indifferent
					backdrop: it is either a force of evil (as in the previous volume’s
					episodes with Old Man Willow and the pass of Caradhras) or good
					(as we see here with the Ents)—almost never neutral. Fangorn is
					willing to help Merry and Pippin from the first moment he meets
					them, offering to convey them through the forest and treating them
					nobly and hospitably thereafter. Both Fangorn and Bregalad offer
					Ent food and shelter to Merry and Pippin out of sheer benevolence,
					expecting nothing in return. As always in The Lord of the
						Rings, good brings creatures together and evil drives them
					apart. The display of hospitality, such as we see here with the
					Ents, is an important idea in Tolkien’s work, and is one of the
					ways in which the world of Middle-earth imitates the ancient Greece
					depicted in epics such as Homer’s Odyssey. In Homer’s world,
					the true measure of a person’s nobility is the generosity with which
					he receives guests. While the Orcs are objectionable hosts to Merry
					and Pippin, the Ents show an ancient and epic regard for giving
					strangers food and shelter.

The full dimensions of the imminent standoff between Gandalf and
					Saruman become clearer in this chapter, as the Ents provide crucial
					insight into the scope of the war that is brewing. Fangorn issues the
					first unequivocal call to arms in the novel, declaring Saruman to be
					evil and announcing the necessity of a large-scale alliance among all
					of Saruman’s enemies. The fact that this initial call to arms is issued
					by a tree creature, rather than one of the Fellowship’s leaders like
					Aragorn or Gandalf, is a measure of the urgency of the conflict at
					hand. The Ents are very deliberate, patient creatures who have been
					dormant for centuries, and they are not at all political beings. They
					seem capable of shrugging off nearly any provocation. However, the
					offenses to which Saruman’s Orcs have subjected the Ents cannot
					be ignored. The enthusiasm of the Ents when roused to action shows
					us that this battle is not just a skirmish among minor, transitory
					figures, but an epochal clash of the primal forces of -Middle-earth.

