As the narrator of Treasure Island and
				the instigator of its most important plot twists, Jim is clearly
				the central character in the novel. Probably around twelve or thirteen
				years old, he is the quiet and obedient son of the owner of an inn
				near Bristol, England. As events unfold throughout the novel, Jim’s
				character changes dramatically, showing increasing cleverness, courage,
				maturity, and perspective. In the first chapters, Jim is an easily
				frightened boy who is closely associated with his home and family.
				Scared by the crusty old seaman Pew, Jim runs to his mother for
				protection. After his father dies and he embarks on the adventure,
				Jim starts to think for himself and shows increasing initiative.
				Jim makes repeated mistakes, but he learns from them, which signals
				that he is maturing. He grows up quickly during this trip, starting
				as the cabin boy but eventually naming himself the new captain after
				he reclaims the ship from the pirates. Although he is courageous,
				Jim’s impetuous individualism reminds us that he is still a youth.
				His tendency to act on his whims and his growing self-awareness
				also shows that he is caught between two worlds—between childhood
				and adulthood, and between the lawful, rational world and the lawless
				pirate world. Jim’s story is therefore not merely a fanciful adventure
				tale but also a narrative about growing up.

	Jim’s narrative of his heroic acts is valuable because
				he records them modestly, giving us an insider view of heroism that
				is not very glamorous. Jim is not arrogant, but instead is humbled
				by his mistakes and successes. He takes full responsibility for
				his errors rather than finding excuses for them, and he confesses
				to moments of panic, indecision, and regret rather than bragging
				exclusively of his successes. Jim’s remarkable honesty and sincerity
				often make the heroic or noble claims of the grown-ups—pirates and
				honorable citizens alike—seem like empty bluster. Jim’s inclusion
				of both his follies and his fortunes make his narrative seem more
				genuine and the adventure more real.

