Du Bois uses this chapter to discusses “sorrow songs.” He describes the songs of the slaves as the “singular spiritual heritage of the nation and the greatest gift of the Negro people.” Du Bois explains how the songs were passed down and eventually performed by traveling musicians. He admits that he does not have technical training in music, but he does speak on the importance of the songs’ message. Du Bois gives examples of several different songs and says that nearly all of the songs are sorrowful, but they do contain hope and a connection to nature or the land. He talks about the different styles and how they are usually categorized. Many have become connected and shaped by religion, incorporating verses / stories from the Bible. He goes on to discuss three gifts Black society has given American society: that of story, that of brawn (hard work), and that of Spirit. He asks, “Would America have been America without her Negro people?” 

In this coda, Du Bois writes that he wishes for all people to go forward with thoughtful deeds and “reap the harvest wonderful.”

Du Bois’s musings about “sorrow songs” reveal his deep reverence for the words, the music, and the cultural significance of spirituals. Through oral tradition, Black families have passed down songs that express the pain, despair, and strength of the slaves who originally sang them, and in doing so they connect the current generation with their ancestors. These songs give voice to the sorrows of the writer’s people, but just as eternal hope is present in most of the essays in this book, Du Bois highlights the fact that the songs are filled with an optimism that signifies the resilience of his people. The fact that Black music has its roots in oral rather than written tradition means that its history is difficult to pinpoint, but this also helps unite Black people across the country together and gives them a sense of connection to their forebears.

In The Afterthought, Du Bois crafts his brief address directly to the reader using Biblical language in order to convey the importance of this final plea to what he presumes is a white audience. His metaphor of the “harvest wonderful” invokes agrarian themes which both nod to Black people’s contributions to American agriculture and invite a white audience to consider the universality of this classic Biblical theme. This approach entreats the audience to take his thoughts to heart and to use their privilege and power to make the world a better place for everyone. 

