Polly goes to visit Lucy at the jail (Lucy lives there
					because she is Brown’s daughter). Polly starts by apologizing for
					the way she behaved the day before. She explains that she was upset
					by Macheath’s behavior and that Lucy should tell him that when she sees
					him. Lucy says that she will not be seeing him. Polly is surprised and
					says perhaps he is avoiding Lucy because she loves him too much.
					They agree that perhaps both of them are too deeply in love with
					him.

Polly then explains how she came to be married to Macheath. She
					tells Lucy that he took her to a hotel and how Polly never would have
					expected to be married twelve days ago. She then asks Lucy why Macheath
					behaved so coldly to Polly the day before. Lucy says that maybe
					Macheath is not to blame and suggests that perhaps Polly should
					have married someone of her own class. Polly considers this suggestion,
					then begins to weep. This outburst finally prompts some sympathy
					from Lucy, who tells Polly that at least she can take consolation
					in being his wife on paper. She goes to fetch something for Polly
					to eat.

As soon as she steps out, Polly hisses an aside to the
					audience, calling Lucy a “silly little fool.” Lucy returns, and
					Polly asks about a picture of Macheath and questions whether Macheath
					brought it there. Lucy says he has never been in this room, and
					now she realizes that Polly has come to find out where Macheath
					is. She calls Polly out on her sneaky plan, but Polly demands to
					know where he is. Lucy says she has no idea. Polly is delighted
					to learn that Lucy is in the dark as well and bursts out laughing
					while Lucy begins to weep. Polly now offers Lucy her own food and
					consoles her. Despondent, Lucy reveals that her pregnancy is fake,
					and Polly laughs even more. She calls Lucy a fool to her face.

Just then, Lucy looks out the window and sees that Macheath
					has been captured again. Polly collapses in despair. Mrs. Peachum enters
					with a widow’s dress for Polly and insists that she put it on. She
					tells Polly that she will make a lovely widow if only she will cheer
					up a little.

The interaction between Lucy and Polly in this scene reiterates
					that even relationships are motivated by self-interest in the play.
					The scene is built on the conflict between two women who want the same
					man and who are willing to descend to the depths of cruelty to get
					him. Polly and Lucy get pleasure from the other’s misery. The reversal
					in their roles, from Lucy laughing while Polly weeps to Lucy weeping
					while Polly laughs, has a pleasing symmetry, but the essence of
					the scene is cruelty. The only reason they are nice to one another
					is to find out more information about Macheath’s current location.
					As the scene begins, Polly does not announce her goal. Instead she
					makes what appears to be idle conversation to try to trick Lucy
					into revealing Macheath’s whereabouts. Similarly, Lucy is suspicious
					of Polly’s purpose in visiting but remains polite until Polly’s
					motive is revealed. Once that goal is exposed, the scene takes a
					dramatic shift. Polly, who seems like a sweet girl, now displays
					her own self-interest by demanding to know where Macheath is and does
					not care if she hurts Lucy in the process.

The scene also offers a measure of advancement in the
					character of Polly. Polly is the only character in the play that
					truly changes because she is motivated by both love and self-interest.
					This capacity for love hits Polly when Macheath arrives at the jail
					and she collapses. Her life is still inextricably bound to his through
					her love, even though she can also be cold-hearted and cruel to
					Lucy. Here the audience sees that her motivation to locate Macheath
					does not necessarily make her a kind person and that she has also
					coarsened over the course of the play. She is no longer just a naïve
					and youthful girl madly in love. Like Lucy, Polly demands what she
					believes is hers—that is, the man she loves. She claims that Macheath
					is her husband. Polly’s apology to Lucy is only used as a means
					of finding her love. Macheath’s rejection and her gradual introduction
					into this world of crime have made her willing to be ruthless. Polly
					will also be cruel if this behavior will help bring her closer to
					Macheath, and she takes great pleasure in Lucy’s despair after she
					tells her that Macheath has left both of them behind.

