The physician of the King’s Abbot village and narrator of the novel. Dr. Sheppard initially serves as Roger Ackroyd’s confidant and family friend. Upon Roger’s murder, he becomes Poirot’s associate in the investigation of his friend’s death. Dr. Sheppard often makes witless or sarcastic observations and claims to detest interfering in others’ affairs. At times, he presents himself as foolish, though he expresses disdain when treated as if he’s unintelligent.

A world-renowned retired detective hired to investigate Roger’s murder. Poirot is often regarded as a strange and ridiculous little man, with quirky habits and prominent mustache, though he proves to be a master of the study of human nature. Poirot is known to hold back his vital impressions until he is certain of the facts.

A successful manufacturer, owner of the Fernly Park estate, and murder victim. Roger is a wealthy widower who has not remarried, though the village gossips about his romantic prospects. On the surface, Roger is viewed as wholesome and charitable. Those closest to him, however, are familiar with his hot-tempered and tightfisted nature.

The town gossip and Dr. Sheppard’s sister. Caroline is unrelentingly critical, though she is capable of sweetness and pity on occasion. With an air of innocuousness, she closely observes the actions of the village’s residents, habitually jumping to conclusions and stubbornly insisting that she is always correct. Caroline fancies herself a gifted detective and is resolute in her duty to reveal what she knows.

The twenty-five-year-old adopted son of Roger Ackroyd and murder suspect. Ralph is extraordinarily handsome and charming, but he is also weak, self-indulgent, and extravagant. Though his relationship with his adopted father is strained, he is well-loved by the citizens of King’s Abbot.

The niece of Roger Ackroyd and murder suspect. Flora is Ralph’s fiancée and is said to be exceptionally beautiful, with pale gold hair, deep blue eyes, and creamy, rosy skin. Some villagers dislike Flora, but all admire her. Though her disposition is mostly sunny, she is sometimes mean-spirited, resentful, and ungrateful.

The widow of Roger’s brother and murder suspect. Mrs. Ackroyd is a self-proclaimed martyr who constantly frets over Roger’s financial obligation to care for herself and Flora. She has a silly fear of unpleasantness and a penchant for gilding the truth. Her rapid speech and distasteful opinions often cause others to flee her company.

The housekeeper at Fernly Park and murder suspect. Miss Russell has a stern eye, an acid smile, and a cast iron demeanor, though she is hardworking and reminiscently attractive to Dr. Sheppard. She battles disdain of her role as servitress with wit and cool composure.

The butler at Fernly Park and murder suspect. Parker’s smug and shifty demeanor evokes distrust in the estate staff and investigators, though he is suave and efficient in the performance of his duties.

The secretary of Roger Ackroyd and murder suspect. Young and debonair, Raymond is mostly cheerful and considered ingenuous. He is proficient in his work for Roger and is not easily ruffled under the dire circumstances of his employer’s death.

A lifelong friend of Roger’s and murder suspect. Known as “the big game man,” Blunt is quiet and expressionless, with grey, brooding eyes that suggest longing to be elsewhere. He claims no interest in wealth and is the only suspect who doesn’t appear to benefit from Roger’s death.

The parlormaid at Fernly Park, Ralph’s secret fiancée, and murder suspect. Ursula is privately weepy after Roger’s murder. Dr. Sheppard considers her pleasant, though she displays disdain under Poirot’s questioning. Ursula reveals herself as ultimately steadfast and resolute as the only suspect without an initial alibi.

A police inspector sent from Cranchester and official lead inspector on Roger Ackroyd’s murder. Raglan is confident that the case will be straightforward. At first resentful of Poirot’s presence, he is quickly won over by Poirot’s charm and agrees to allow Poirot to help. Despite his theories frequently being wrong, he and Poirot find a way to tolerate each other.  

The local police inspector at King’s Abbot and the first inspector on the scene of the crime. Inspector Davis almost immediately suspects Parker of the murder without spending much time gathering evidence or interviewing suspects. His clumsy antics and faulty conclusions are a stark contrast with Poirot’s.

The undisclosed son of Miss Russell and murder suspect. Kent is branded a foreigner due to his American-like accent, though he claims to be British. His weathered appearance, shaking hands, and shifty eyes are attributed to drug addiction, though his defiance and defensiveness on questioning suggest a possible connection to Roger’s murder.

