At the Osborne house, Mr. Osborne provides Georgy with everything he needs to become a gentleman. However, Georgy looks down on his uneducated grandfather and treats others arrogantly. He reminds everyone of his father, and Mr. Osborne seems to be reliving his relationship with his son George through his grandson Georgy. Georgy also looks down on his maternal grandfather, Mr. Sedley, and has little feeling when his grandmother, Mrs. Sedley, dies. Despite Georgy’s behavior, Amelia only sees good in him and is thrilled when he gives her a portrait of himself. When Georgy gets older, he attends an elite school. One day, two men come to visit Georgy. He recognizes Dobbin.

Even though Mr. Osborne poisons Georgy’s mind against Mr. Sedley, Amelia has no choice but to live on Mr. Osborne’s charity. At her mother’s funeral, Amelia fantasizes she is in the casket instead. Feeling ashamed, she throws herself into making her father happy. Meanwhile, Dobbin and Jos travel back from India by boat. Dobbin falls gravely ill and raves about his love for Amelia in front of Jos, but he recovers when he learns that Amelia is not getting married. Jos, who plans to live in England, agrees to take care of Amelia and Georgy.

Dobbin and Jos finally arrive in England. Dobbin wants to head to London immediately, but Jos refuses. The next morning, an impatient Dobbin ends up traveling to London alone. He heads to Amelia’s house, and the landlord’s daughter recognizes him. She guides him to the garden, where Amelia has gone with Mr. Sedley. When Dobbin and Amelia see each other, Amelia starts to cry and runs toward him. She asks if he’s brought back his wife. Dobbin says he has returned with Jos. Back at the house, after Mr. Sedley falls asleep, Amelia regales Dobbin with stories of Georgy and says how much he looks like his father. Dobbin feels jealous of his dead friend.

When Jos arrives, he offers his family a home with him. He also implies that Amelia will marry Dobbin, but Amelia has no intention of betraying George even though she recognizes Dobbin’s feelings for her. Dobbin helps Jos find a new house, and the family moves. When the cart arrives with their belongings, Dobbin is pleased to see the old piano. Amelia says she values it greatly because George gave it to her. Dobbin’s face falls, and Amelia realizes that he gave it to her, not George. When Mr. Sedley asks her to play, she makes excuses. A few days later, Amelia thanks Dobbin for the gift. Dobbin can no longer hold back. He reveals his pent-up feelings and apologizes for not telling her the truth about the piano. Amelia responds that she can’t love anyone other than George. Dobbin promises to not speak of love and remain content with friendship.

Amelia’s life is greatly improved by her move. She socializes with Jane Osborne, Dobbin’s sisters, and many other well-placed people. Mr. Osborne even lets Georgy visit more often because he’s heard that Jos is wealthy. Georgy respects Dobbin and behaves better in his godfather’s presence.

Mr. Sedley falls ill and dies. His death has an impact on Mr. Osborne, as does hearing about Dobbin’s distinction from acquaintances. Examining his financial accounts, Mr. Osborne realizes that Dobbin has been supporting Amelia and Georgy. He invites Dobbin for dinner several times. They often talk about George’s bravery, and Dobbin tries to get Mr. Osborne to soften his stance on Amelia. Mr. Osborne also relents on Jos, inviting him to dinner and admonishing Georgy for making fun of his uncle. A reconciliation is planned with Amelia, but Mr. Osborne dies before the meeting. He leaves half of his property to Georgy and an annuity to Amelia, who finally learns how Dobbin supported her financially. They make plans to travel abroad.

Chapter LVI marks an important event in Amelia’s life and in the novel: the return of Dobbin to London. In truth, he couldn’t come back soon enough. Dobbin has long been the glue that held Amelia’s life together, even though she has never realized it. Most recently, Amelia has given up guardianship of Georgy and lost her mother. Dobbin has always taken direct action to make Amelia happy or improve her circumstance, so his arrival in Chapter LVI means that change is afoot. Based on the patterns the novel has already established placing Amelia and Becky on parallel paths and because Becky’s fortune has turned so drastically, it seems likely that Amelia’s is about to change as well.

There is no question that without Dobbin, Amelia would not have gotten guardianship of Georgy upon Mr. Osborne’s death. Nor would she have received his annuity, which vastly elevates her lifestyle. No one has been able to make Mr. Osborne soften his hardline stance on George’s marriage and his refusal to help Amelia until Dobbin. However, Dobbin possesses no special trick to get Mr. Osborne to change his mind. Dobbin simply must be what he always is: himself. Unusual in Vanity Fair, Dobbin’s character is so much an integral part of him that even though he does not put his virtue deliberately on display, everyone can see that he is a good man. Once returned to London, Dobbin garners such a fine reputation that he gets invited to socialize with aristocrats. Suddenly the snobbish Mr. Osborne is willing to meet with him. While Mr. Osborne’s motivations for making the acquaintance are self-centered and distasteful, he immediately comes to respect Dobbin because of the younger man’s honesty and generosity. The two men form a friendship that warms the old curmudgeon’s heart, allowing him to talk openly about George and consider reconciling with Amelia. Dobbin thus brings Amelia what she most values.

Dobbin creates further change when Georgy grows quite attached to him. Curiously, the three adults to whom Georgy has the closest connections all associate him with his father, George. But at his mother’s and grandfather’s hands, Georgy has grown into a brat who enjoys bullying, bragging, and beating other kids up. Still, Amelia considers the boy to be the epitome of kindness and goodness—essentially, she has deified Georgy as a replacement for George, who she also views as an ideal male. Mr. Osborne sees in Georgy the unexpected opportunity to make up for his harsh behavior toward George, which led to a complete rupture between father and son that never was healed. Mr. Osborne hopes to redeem himself and his memories of his son. Because both Amelia and Mr. Osborne invest so much of themselves in Georgy—their past, their misdeeds, their hopes—they are unable to view him with any objectivity. But Dobbin treats Georgy in a wholly different manner: He treats him like a normal, curious, rambunctious boy who can learn and be a good person but who needs a role model. Dobbin, in fact, treats Georgy much as he did George.

Despite how critical Dobbin’s arrival is to Amelia’s good fortune, her attitude toward him is unyielding. When Amelia first heard that Dobbin was to marry Glorvina O’Dowd, back in Chapter XXXVII, tears proved she was upset by the news, though she claimed not to be. Now, upon Dobbin’s return, the first words she speaks are “‘Mrs. Dobbin?’” Her query shows just how much this possibility has stayed with her. Yet when Dobbin finally reveals that he gave Amelia the piano and that he’s been in love with her for years, she shuts him down completely despite all the reasons to explore a relationship with him. She offers instead more of the same: a one-sided friendship in which Dobbin is the giver and Amelia is the taker. Dobbin agrees because, based on Amelia’s reaction to his declaration of love, he can tell that she lacks the emotional maturity to process this new circumstance. Dobbin must continue to treat Amelia as if she were a child, just as he always has.

Amelia no longer needs Dobbin’s money, however. Mr. Osborne’s bequest directly leads to Amelia’s independence and rise in social status. Her new fortune means that she attracts friends of a higher social class again, which is further proof of just how shallow the friendships in Vanity Fair are. It’s no wonder that Amelia wants to go abroad with the only people she feels have truly supported and befriended her.

