Lancelot is unable to act on his love for Guenever because
					his religion and Arthur’s own principles about fairness and justice,
					in which Lancelot believes deeply, forbid him to do so. While everyone else
					thinks Lancelot is a great man, he hates himself.

Lancelot stays at Arthur’s court in Camelot for several
					weeks, but he cannot bring himself to do anything about Guenever.
					He is afraid that if he sleeps with her, he will lose his strength
					and his position as Arthur’s best knight. Uncle Dap advises him
					to go on another quest, so he makes his way to the haunted castle
					of Corbin, which is owned by King Pelles. On the way, Lancelot is
					stopped by villagers who tell him that fairies, among them Morgan
					le Fay, have put a spell on a local girl and placed her in a vat
					of boiling water, from which she can be saved only by the best knight
					in the world. Lancelot tries to refuse, but they insist, and he
					ends up pulling a naked young woman named Elaine out of the vat.
					Afterward, they are greeted by Elaine’s father, who turns out to
					be King Pelles. Pelles invites Lancelot to stay. Excited by Elaine’s
					great beauty, Lancelot cannot yet understand that he has performed
					a miracle.

At the castle of Corbin, Lancelot is miserable and thinks
					of Guenever. Pelles’s butler cheers Lancelot with wine. While Lancelot
					is intoxicated, Pelles’s butler tells Lancelot that Guenever is
					staying at a nearby castle, waiting for Lancelot. Lancelot rushes
					off to see her. The next morning, he wakes up and sees that the
					woman in bed with him is Elaine. Realizing that he has been tricked,
					Lancelot threatens to kills Elaine. He thinks that his strength
					lies in his virginity and that he will now no longer be able to
					work miracles or be the best knight. Elaine tells Lancelot that
					she loves him and wishes to bear his child, whom she will name Galahad.
					Lancelot says that since she tricked him the baby will be hers alone
					and that he is leaving.

At Camelot, Guenever thinks of Lancelot as she stitches
					a new shield cover for Arthur. Convinced that Elaine has ruined
					him, Lancelot sees no point in not furthering his destruction, and
					he races up the stairs to Guenever. Before they realize what is
					happening, they have slept together.

King Ban, Lancelot’s father, is under attack and writes
					Arthur to ask for help. Arthur leaves for France after asking Lancelot
					to stay behind and guard his kingdom. While Arthur is away, Lancelot
					and Guenever spend twelve happy months together. Lancelot tells
					Guenever that when he was little, he was a very holy little boy,
					always punishing himself for the slightest faults. Lancelot tells
					Guenever that he originally stayed away from her because he was
					worried that by sleeping with her he would lose his ability to perform
					miracles. He adds that he is giving her his God-given gifts as a
					present for her love, and that he does not regret it.

When Guenever learns, however, that Elaine has given birth
					to a baby boy named Galahad—Lancelot’s first name—she realizes that Lancelot
					and Elaine have slept together. Hurt, Guenever becomes petulant,
					lashing out at Lancelot and threatening to have Elaine executed.
					Eventually, Lancelot and Guenever are tearfully reconciled, but
					a seed of hatred and distrust has been planted in their love affair.

Lancelot is conflicted by two contradictory passions—his
					love for Guenever and his love for Arthur and chivalry. Elaine’s
					sudden appearance makes balancing these two passions impossible. Already,
					everything that Lancelot does to try to distance himself from Guenever
					only deepens his love for her, but at least he has managed to keep
					his two worlds separate. He is always an unsatisfied lover, but
					on his earlier quests, he is also a knight and can take refuge in
					a world that is all about fighting and ethics. Once he meets Elaine, however,
					even this line becomes blurred. His quests can no longer honestly
					be said to be about fighting and remedying injustice, since his
					tryst with Elaine has filled them with the kind of amorous intrigue
					from which he has been running. The effects of this tryst are irreversible.
					Among other things, Lancelot loses, or at least thinks he has lost,
					his power to perform miracles, since only virgins are supposed to
					be allowed to perform miracles. Even on a less mystical level, sleeping
					with Elaine has so contaminated Lancelot’s quest that he thinks
					of his entire knighthood as having been corrupted and ruined. Now
					that Lancelot’s two worlds have been forced to mingle, Lancelot
					sees no reason not to ruin them altogether, and rushes into Guenever’s
					arms.

The figure of Elaine in these chapters, as well as our
					developing understanding of Guenever’s character, raises some questions
					about the novel’s treatment of women. As much as The Once
						and Future King seems to be a rejection of the machismo
					of earlier Arthurian tales, it is very much a man’s world, where
					even the best-intentioned women have a destructive effect. Guenever
					and Elaine are certainly not as evil or unlikable as Morgause, whom
					the novel portrays quite misogynistically. Nonetheless, the novel
					treats Guenever and Elaine more like the Orkney family than like
					Arthur or Lancelot. Like Gawaine, Guenever and Elaine have good
					hearts, but their circumstances force them to be petty, demanding,
					and conniving, whereas Lancelot and Arthur are still portrayed as
					selfless and noble. The novel explains that Guenever has good reason
					for her behavior, but she is still overwhelmingly depicted as mean
					and spiteful. Elaine is described as a sweet girl who is smitten
					by Lancelot, but she tricks him and her demands on him only increase
					with time. To a certain extent, these are flattering portrayals
					of both women, allowing them to be human beings instead of boring,
					saintly figures. Since the story of Arthur was written well before
					White wrote The Once and Future King, he had only
					a limited amount of room to shape his plot without veering away
					from the Arthurian canon. One could argue, however, that the novel
					still treats women disrespectfully and that, however objective White
					may want to be, we cannot help but despise his two main female characters.

