Julia argues with her twin sister, Izzy, until Judge DeSalvo calls. The judge
					asks Julia if she will be the guardian ad litem in Anna’s case. Julia agrees and
					goes to the Fitzgerald house where she meets Anna. Julia takes Anna to the zoo to
					talk, hoping it might loosen her up. Julia can’t determine why exactly Anna filed
					the lawsuit, but she realizes that Anna will either lose her sister or herself. At
					the house Julia meets Sara. Julia tries to speak with Sara, but Sara brushes her
					off. Julia realizes that it will be difficult for Anna to live there during the
					course of the legal proceedings without being swayed by her mother. Afterward Julia
					goes to Campbell’s office. It emerges that they have had a romance in the past and
					that they haven’t spoken in years.

Campbell works in his office when Julia walks in. He feels shocked to see her
					for the first time in fifteen years. After some awkward conversation, the two
					discuss Anna. Campbell suggests removing Sara from the house, but Julia thinks it is
					the wrong course of action. The two argue and the dog, Judge, becomes increasingly
					agitated. Finally, Campbell leaves Julia alone in his office. In a flashback to
					their high-school years, Campbell remembers when Julia arrived at their prep school.
					She looked different than the other girls and kept to herself. One day Campbell
					followed her to a cemetery and asked for help with his homework. In the present,
					Campbell straightens himself up in a bathroom. When he goes back to his office,
					Julia has gone. In another flashback, we see Campbell and Julia as teenagers sharing
					their first kiss.

Back in the present, Campbell goes to see Anna at her house. Initially, he
					feels awkward around Anna and admits that he usually doesn’t spend time with his
					clients. Later that night, Campbell visits Julia. At first he confuses her with her
					twin sister, Izzy, who acts angrily toward Campbell. Campbell and Julia talk and
					catch up. Julia admits to Campbell that it is hard to be around him after everything
					that happened between them.

Anna asks Jesse to drive her to the hospital. Jesse tells Anna that she is not
					doing the wrong thing, but she tells him that she’s not doing the right thing
					either. Jesse agrees to help Anna see Kate by distracting their mother. In a
					flashback, Kate wants to talk to Anna about death and the best way to die, but Anna
					refuses. In the present, Jesse pretends to be drunk in order to get Sara away from
					Kate’s hospital room. Anna goes into Kate’s room, and we see another flashback in
					which the entire family plays football on Thanksgiving. Jesse accidentally knocks
					Kate down, and Brian gets angry at him. Jesse says he forgot, and Kate smiles. She’s
					thrilled that, for a moment, Jesse forgot she had cancer. In the present, Anna
					climbs into Kate’s bed with her. In her thoughts she acknowledges that she didn’t
					come to see Kate to feel better, but because without Kate, she can’t remember who
					she is.

The section introduces Julia Romano, who serves as another parental surrogate
					for Anna. Campbell became the first surrogate for Anna when he took on her case,
					though only to a limited degree as up until this point he has insisted that their
					relationship remain distanced and professional. Both Julia and Campbell act as
					Anna’s protector in various ways, Campbell by serving as Anna’s legal counsel and
					Julia by working to determine what is best for Anna as her guardian ad litem. As
					parental figures, Julia and Campbell stand in stark contrast to Anna’s actual
					parents, Sara and Brian. Julia and Campbell work for Anna alone and do not have to
					consider Kate’s health as Sara and Brian do. This fact makes them arguably more
					capable than Anna’s true parents of determining what is best for Anna. Yet even
					Campbell and Julia struggle to reach clear conclusions. Campbell, for instance,
					decides he no longer wants Sara removed from the house after he speaks with
					Anna.

Campbell’s narration in this section, specifically his memories and behavior
					regarding Julia, add entirely new dimensions to his character. Campbell, who until
					now has presented himself as a flashy lawyer, obviously cares deeply about Julia and
					feels regret for whatever happened in their past. These feelings are the first real
					emotions the reader has seen from Campbell. Julia’s presence even seems to alter
					Campbell’s relationship with Anna. After meeting with Julia, Campbell goes to Anna’s
					house to visit her on a purely personal level, something he admits he has never done
					before. Yet even with Julia, Campbell is not completely honest. He offers another
					false explanation for the presence of his service dog, and he leaves their meeting
					without any real explanation. Campbell, like Anna, appears intent on keeping up an
					outward appearance in order to keep something else hidden.

Julia and her sister, Izzy, establish another relationship between sisters in
					the novel. Both Julia and Anna have sisters linked very closely with their
					identities, to the point that their sisters are fundamentally part of who they are.
					Scientifically, both Julia and Anna share almost identical genes with their sisters.
					Both also act as protectors of their sisters. Julia protects Izzy psychologically.
					As Julia describes it, she was Izzy’s “nuclear bomb,” eliminating anything that
					upset Izzy when they were younger. Now, she allows Izzy to move in after her painful
					breakup with her girlfriend. Anna, meanwhile, has saved Kate’s life by donating her
					blood and bone marrow to Kate. Both, in other words, act as their sister’s keeper.
					Significantly, Anna’s lawsuit appears to directly contradict her role as Kate’s
					protector at this point.

Although we do not hear from Kate directly, Anna’s memories disclose more
					about Kate’s character. Kate, who has almost always been sick, has had to confront
					the thought of dying for her entire life, and she appears, at least outwardly, to be
					almost comfortable with the idea. Kate talks about death in a calm and almost
					humorous way, which Anna, for whom death remains a morbid and frightening subject,
					can’t handle. In the same vein, Sara and Brian can’t treat Kate like a normal child
					because they cannot forget about her illness. When Jesse tackles her in a football
					game, they immediately worry about her health. Kate, on the other hand, feels happy
					that someone forgot she had cancer. Even if just for a moment, someone treated her
					like a healthy girl, not like a patient, which was rare enough to Kate for it to
					feel significant.

