Brian rushes to Campbell, who has had a seizure. Julia asks if Campbell will
					be okay, and Brian assures her that Campbell will be fine. In the Judge’s chambers,
					Campbell regains consciousness. He doesn’t remember what happened, but Brian fills
					him in. Campbell apologizes to his dog for not listening. Brian helps Campbell
					change into clean clothes, and Campbell admits that he’s been hiding his seizures
					since he was eighteen. He says they started after a car crash. Julia enters the
					room, and Brian leaves. Brian observes that things don’t always look as they
					seem.

Campbell tells Julia he had a car accident the night he took her home from his
					parent’s house. The seizures started that night, and he has hidden them from
					everyone ever since. Judge, he explains, is an epilepsy dog, and he broke up with
					Julia he didn’t think she should have to live with his seizures. Julia tells
					Campbell that you don’t love someone because they’re perfect but in spite of their
					imperfection. She also tells Campbell that she will never leave him.

Anna talks to Campbell alone. She asks him if he took her case because he
					knows what it’s like not to have control over his own body. He says “maybe.” They go
					back to the courtroom and Anna takes the stand again. Campbell asks Anna to confirm
					that Kate asked her to file the petition, and Anna says that’s not exactly true. She
					says Kate asked Anna to kill her.

In a flashback, Anna finds Kate drunk with a bottle of pills. Kate tells Anna
					she’s sick of waiting for something that’s going to happen anyway, and she’s tired
					of ruining everyone’s lives. But she admits that she can’t kill herself. Anna
					realizes this means Kate has tried before. Back in the courtroom in the present,
					Sara says Anna’s story isn’t true. Anna tells her mother that Kate didn’t say
					anything because she knew telling Sara would kill her, too. Anna also says she
					doesn’t want Kate to die, but Kate doesn’t want to live the way she’s been living.
					Anna, as always, is the only one who can give her what she wants.

In another flashback, Kate asks Anna not to donate her kidney. She
					acknowledges that there are so many things Anna could do if she weren’t around. Anna
					feels ashamed to admit that she has had the same thought. In the present, Campbell
					asks Anna if she’s willing to take an action that might kill her sister. Anna says
					Kate wanted it, but admits that she wanted it, too. It would be the worst and best
					thing to happen to her. Anna told Kate she was going to be stop being a donor. Kate
					thanked her.

Judge DeSalvo moves the proceeding to the hospital so he can talk to Kate.
					When they arrive, Kate is watching TV with Jesse. Judge DeSalvo speaks with Kate
					alone. When he leaves Kate’s room, he tells Sara, Brian, and Campbell that he will
					announce his decision the following morning. Before Julia and Campbell leave,
					Campbell tells Sara he is sorry. The entire family gathers in Kate’s room. Anna
					tells Kate that she tried. Jesse jokes with Kate to lighten the mood. Everyone
					leaves except for Sara. She climbs into bed with Kate and tells her how sorry she
					is. Kate tells her not to be, because she isn’t.

Anna’s revealing to the court that Kate, in fact, convinced her not to donate
					her kidney, and that Kate did so because she wants to die, dramatically changes our
					understanding of Anna’s actions in the novel, again demonstrating that appearance
					and reality don’t always converge. Up until now, Anna appeared to have filed the
					lawsuit because she wanted to make her own decisions, specifically where they
					concerned her own body, and because she wanted finally to be able to put her own
					interests ahead of Kate’s. Although these desires may have played a role in the
					lawsuit, Anna has still essentially allowed Kate to decide that Anna will not donate
					her kidney, and Anna has put Kate’s interests first all along. As Anna says, just as
					she has always been the one who could keep Kate alive, she is also the one who can
					give Kate what she wants in this case. By winning medical emancipation from her
					parents, Anna can refuse to donate her kidney, allowing Kate to die. Anna hid this
					information because she knew revealing Kate’s desire to die would hurt her parents,
					and Sara in particular.

The reasons behind Anna’s decision to file a petition once again reveal that
					complex situations have no simple solutions. Anna feels pulled in two directions.
					She wants control over her life and to not have to consider Kate in every decision
					she makes, but she also wants to do what she feels is best for Kate. Anna, in
					satisfying her own desire for independence and giving Kate control over her own
					death, will lose her sister and closest friend. At the same time, Anna has withheld
					her reasons for the lawsuit from Sara, causing Sara to direct a great deal of anger
					and frustration at Anna. But Anna did not tell Sara her real reasons because she
					wanted to protect her. Possibly the only thing that would hurt Sara more than Anna
					refusing to give Kate a kidney is the knowledge that Kate feels so unhappy she would
					prefer to die.

Campbell’s seizure finally uncovers his secret, that he has had epilepsy since
					a car crash in high school, and this new information makes his motives throughout
					the novel more clear. We learn, for instance, that Campbell ended his relationship
					with Julia because he assumed she wouldn’t want to deal with his epilepsy. He loved
					her independence and didn’t want to interfere with it. Rather than explain the
					situation to her, he simply stopped seeing her. When she asks Campbell he didn’t
					tell her what happened, he says he never even told his parents, implying that he
					feels ashamed of the epilepsy. That embarrassment explains why Campbell does not
					tell people why he needs a service dog, and why he seems uncomfortable after his
					seizure in court. These details add even more depth to his character. More and more,
					we see Campbell to be a vulnerable person who hides his insecurities by keeping
					people at a distance and using sarcasm to deflect questions, rather than the smug
					attorney he appeared to be at the beginning of the novel. As Brian suggests after he
					helps Campbell following his seizure, things aren’t always what they
					seem.

