On a May morning in 1862,
					Scarlett, Prissy, and Wade arrive in Atlanta to visit Melanie and
					Aunt Pittypat. Atlanta, a railroad hub, has sprouted army departments,
					hospitals, and foundries during the war. At the Hamilton house on
					Peachtree Street, Pittypat and Melanie are thrilled to see Scarlett.
					Uncle Henry, Pittypat’s brother, talks to Scarlett about Charles’s
					fortune, which is now Scarlett’s. The hustle and energy revive Scarlett.
					Her only complaint is that she must do volunteer nursing work in
					the soldiers’ hospitals, which are full of sweaty, wounded men that
					stink of gangrene.

The hospital holds a fundraising bazaar, but as a widow
					in mourning Scarlett cannot attend without breaching decorum. Unlike
					the other widows, she thinks it unfair that she works like a “field
					hand” to prepare for the bazaar but cannot attend. At the last moment, Scarlett
					and Melanie are called in to work at a booth. At the bazaar, Scarlett
					is shocked by her own lack of patriotism during the speeches about
					the glorious Confederate cause. She longs to dance. Rhett Butler,
					now a famous blockade-runner for the South, appears and teases her
					about her marriage to Charles. Dr. Meade, Atlanta’s foremost citizen,
					sends around a collection basket to encourage women to donate their
					jewelry. Scarlett donates her hated wedding ring. Melanie mistakes
					Scarlett’s action for courage and throws her own wedding ring into
					the basket.

	Dr. Meade scandalously proposes that gentlemen must bid
					to dance with the lady of their choice in order to raise money for
					the hospital. As a widow, Scarlett is strictly forbidden to dance,
					but Rhett bids a hundred and fifty dollars in gold on her. To the
					shock of the crowd, Scarlett accepts and hurries to the dance floor.
					Rhett tells Scarlett that he admires her beauty and spirit and that
					he knows the Cause bores her as it bores him. Scarlett pretends
					to be angry, but she knows that what he says is true. 

The next morning, Atlanta buzzes with gossip about Scarlett’s shocking
					behavior. Pittypat says that Rhett is a terrible man, but forgives
					him when he sends a gift: Melanie’s wedding ring, which he bought
					back. Gerald arrives to confront Rhett and take Scarlett back to
					Tara in disgrace. He leaves to talk to Rhett and returns in the middle
					of the night, drunk and penniless from playing poker. In the morning,
					Scarlett promises to keep his behavior a secret as long as he allows
					her to stay in Atlanta. He agrees.

The following week, Scarlett sneaks into Melanie’s room
					to read a letter Melanie recently received from Ashley. In it Ashley
					discusses his doubts about the war, but Scarlett pays little attention
					to his soul-searching questions. She is simply relieved that Ashley
					has not written Melanie a love letter. Scarlett puts away the letter,
					convinced that Ashley still loves her.

Mitchell divides Gone with the Wind into
					sixty-three chapters, dividing those chapters into five parts. Each
					new part begins with a shift in Scarlett’s life and in the life
					of the South. Chapter VIII, the first chapter of Part Two, marks
					the end of Scarlett’s comfortable and privileged life at Tara and
					the beginning of her consciousness of the Civil War. Though the
					war actually starts in Chapter VII, Scarlett does not move to Atlanta
					until Chapter VIII, and it is only in Atlanta that she begins to
					feel the reality of the war. Part Two also marks the beginning of
					Scarlett’s life as a seventeen-year-old widow. Earlier, back at
					Tara, gala parties and masses of admirers surround her. In Atlanta
					her social life changes entirely. Although Scarlett knows some people
					in Atlanta, she now spends her time with Melanie, Pittypat, and
					older married or widowed women. 

	The Civil War relaxes the stringent rules governing women’s behavior,
					however. Because men must go off to war, courtship and marriage
					must happen with new speed. The hospitals need volunteers so badly
					that even widows like Scarlett find themselves attending to wounded
					and sick men and seeing sights previously thought too vulgar for
					a woman’s eyes. Even guidelines for widows change slightly. According
					to the customs of the Old South, widows must wear black for years
					after the death of their husbands, and for them it is unthinkable
					to enjoy the company of an unmarried man, much less dance with one.
					However, the topsy-turvy atmosphere of war makes such rules mutable,
					and thus Scarlett can dance with Rhett in Chapter XII and afterward
					still show her face in Atlanta society. In a time of few resources
					and overwhelming motivation to support the war effort, people realign
					their priorities to give primacy to the war rather than to custom.

	Just as Mitchell uses Ashley and Rhett to represent the
					Old South and the New South, respectively, she equates Tara with
					the Old South and Atlanta with the changing, New South. Tara stands
					for a slavery-driven plantation world of leisure and luxury for
					the wealthy owners. Atlanta, Gerald tells Scarlett, was born the
					same year she was, and like Scarlett it lives through newness and
					change. Scarlett’s old way of life cannot survive in this new world.
					No longer idle and pampered as she is back at Tara, she spends much
					of her time nursing wounded soldiers and rolling bandages for the
					war. She even notes that she feels like a slave. In Scarlett’s eyes,
					at least, social codes have been turned on their heads when a Southern
					belle like herself must work as hard as a field hand. At Tara, Scarlett
					tries to adhere to old Southern values. In Atlanta, however, she
					begins to defy the rules that society has impressed upon her since
					birth. Scarlett has always felt rebellious, but in Atlanta she acts
					on her rebelliousness, boldly dancing despite her widowhood. Scarlett
					remains nervous about stepping out of line, but Atlanta’s wartime
					culture grants her room to express her strong will and follow her
					selfish desires—until Atlanta itself changes in Part Three.

