As a bildungsroman, Great Expectations presents
the growth and development of a single character, Philip Pirrip,
better known to himself and to the world as Pip. As the focus of
the bildungsroman, Pip is by far the most important character in Great
Expectations: he is both the protagonist, whose actions
make up the main plot of the novel, and the narrator, whose thoughts
and attitudes shape the reader’s perception of the story. As a result,
developing an understanding of Pip’s character is perhaps the most
important step in understanding Great Expectations.

Because Pip is narrating his story many years
after the events of the novel take place, there are really two Pips
in Great Expectations: Pip the narrator and Pip
the character—the voice telling the story and the person acting
it out. Dickens takes great care to distinguish the two Pips, imbuing
the voice of Pip the narrator with perspective and maturity while
also imparting how Pip the character feels about what is happening
to him as it actually happens. This skillfully executed distinction
is perhaps best observed early in the book, when Pip the character
is a child; here, Pip the narrator gently pokes fun at his younger
self, but also enables us to see and feel the story through his
eyes.

As a character, Pip’s two most important traits are his
immature, romantic idealism and his innately good conscience. On
the one hand, Pip has a deep desire to improve himself and attain
any possible advancement, whether educational, moral, or social.
His longing to marry Estella and join the upper classes stems from
the same idealistic desire as his longing to learn to read and his
fear of being punished for bad behavior: once he understands ideas
like poverty, ignorance, and immorality, Pip does not want to be
poor, ignorant, or immoral. Pip the narrator judges his own past
actions extremely harshly, rarely giving himself credit for good
deeds but angrily castigating himself for bad ones. As a character,
however, Pip’s idealism often leads him to perceive the world rather
narrowly, and his tendency to oversimplify situations based on superficial
values leads him to behave badly toward the people who care about
him. When Pip becomes a gentleman, for example, he immediately begins
to act as he thinks a gentleman is supposed to act, which leads
him to treat Joe and Biddy snobbishly and coldly.

On the other hand, Pip is at heart a very generous and
sympathetic young man, a fact that can be witnessed in his numerous
acts of kindness throughout the book (helping Magwitch, secretly
buying Herbert’s way into business, etc.) and his essential love
for all those who love him. Pip’s main line of development in the
novel may be seen as the process of learning to place his innate
sense of kindness and conscience above his immature idealism.

Not long after meeting Miss Havisham and Estella, Pip’s
desire for advancement largely overshadows his basic goodness. After receiving
his mysterious fortune, his idealistic wishes seem to have been
justified, and he gives himself over to a gentlemanly life of idleness.
But the discovery that the wretched Magwitch, not the wealthy Miss
Havisham, is his secret benefactor shatters Pip’s oversimplified sense
of his world’s hierarchy. The fact that he comes to admire Magwitch
while losing Estella to the brutish nobleman Drummle ultimately
forces him to realize that one’s social position is not the most
important quality one possesses, and that his behavior as a gentleman
has caused him to hurt the people who care about him most. Once
he has learned these lessons, Pip matures into the man who narrates
the novel, completing the bildungsroman.

Take the Analysis of Major Characters Quick Quiz

