While driving away from the storm, Percy notices a creature following them in the distance. He questions Grover and Sally’s relationship and what kind of animal Grover is. Grover explains that he is a satyr in charge of protecting Percy, but the less he knows, the fewer monsters he will attract. Sally begins driving Percy to the camp for protection after learning that the three old women Percy encountered were the Fates. The car swerves into a ditch, which injures Grover. Sally encourages Percy to get help by running past a big tree that marks the property line to safety. He refuses to leave without her and Grover, despite the creature that is steadily creeping up on them. 

Sally and Percy finally pull Grover out of the car and head toward the tree. Outside of the car, Percy recognizes the monster as half bull, half man. He starts to name the monster, but his mother warns him that names have power. She advises him to jump to the side if the creature attacks, since a bull cannot change directions easily. Percy does so when the bull charges, which angers the monster. The monster then attacks his mother and Grover who are on the side of the road. The bull-man grabs Percy’s mother by the neck, and she disappears into a golden light. Furious, Percy defeats the monster by tearing off one of the monster’s horns and shoving it into the monster’s ribs. Percy helps Grover to safety and the two pass out on the porch of a farmhouse after a young girl recognizes him as the “one.” 

After being nursed back to health, Percy enjoys the beautiful views of the camp, despite feeling remorse for what he assumes was his mother’s death. He tries to remember the battle with the bull-man, which he now calls the Minotaur. Grover apologizes to Percy for not being able to save Sally and for his failure in the role of a keeper. Percy does not blame Grover though and the two leave the farmhouse and enter into the main part of Camp Half-Blood. Percy meets Mr. D, the camp director; Chiron, who he knew as Mr. Brunner; and Annabeth, one of the daughters of Athena. He learns that Chiron had been at the school to teach Percy after Grover suggested that Percy was special. 

Percy joins Chiron, Mr. D, and Grover in a game of pinochle. While playing the game, they discuss the presence of Greek gods in the world and comment on how Mr. D is one himself: Dionysus, the god of wine. Mr. D and Grover leave so that Chiron and Percy can have a private conversation. Chiron and Percy discuss more about Mount Olympus and the Greek gods. Chiron tells Percy that he will learn more about himself and his role after he gets settled in his cabin. At this point, Percy sees Chiron as his true self—a centaur.

While walking Percy to his cabin, Chiron gives Percy a tour of the camp. Percy learns this was Grover’s second chance to restore his role as a keeper after he failed five years ago. Percy fears he will be in trouble if Mr. D and the Council of Cloven Elders consider his mission to protect Percy a failure. Upon approaching the cabins, Percy notices that each cabin features a mascot dedicated to a god. Annabeth greets him before he enters his cabin. He has been placed in “Hermes,” the cabin for undetermined campers. Here, he meets his cabin counselor, Luke, the son of Hermes. 

Percy is disappointed that he has not received proper recognition for fighting the Minotaur and leaves the cabin. Annabeth joins him outside and explains that monsters do not die because they lack a soul. They can still reform and he should refer to them as “Kindly Ones,” rather than by their names. Annabeth also points out that Percy would not be here if he were not a half-blood by his father. As they are talking, another girl, Clarisse, the daughter of Ares, provokes Percy and Annabeth into a fight in the bathroom. Percy defends himself by unknowingly manipulating the water to soak Clarisse and her friends. Angered and humiliated, she declares war on Percy.

Friendship forms an important component of The Lightning Thief. Percy’s close friendship with Grover is juxtaposed with his general lack of friends upon first entering Camp Half-Blood. The strength of Grover and Percy’s relationship is exhibited when Percy risks his own safety to help Grover escape the Minotaur, and when he shares his remorse for leaving Grover at the bus station, as it may have ruined Grover’s chances of being a keeper. Even though Percy enters a camp filled with people like him, the traumatic event with the Minotaur has left him unable to forge new connections. At this point, Percy does not know anyone other than Chiron and Grover, and he has to deal with the grief of losing his mother to mythical beasts. As a result, it’s extremely difficult for Percy to adapt to his new surroundings.

The continued presence of Greek mythology contrasts with the ordinary world Percy thought he lived in. He realizes that there are aspects of his world that exist outside of his perception when he learns that his friend Grover is actually a satyr, a nature spirit that is part horse, part goat, and part man. Even his mother’s decision to stay with his abusive stepfather was to protect Percy from monsters, suggesting that the only person not privy to this world was Percy. While Percy’s encounter with Greek mythology challenges his view of the world, it also provides a glimpse into his own journey and transformation. Chiron refers to Percy by his full first name, Perseus. In Greek mythology, Chiron has trained some of the greatest heroes, implying such a future awaits Percy.

Camp Half-Blood introduces new struggles for Percy, specifically those of identity and how his identity is shaped by his family. Previously, Percy believed his only family was his mother and that he was simply a troubled youth. However, the loss of his mother and the revelation that his father is actually a Greek god challenge how he currently views himself. Since family is so important to Percy, this directly affects how he feels at the camp; he now knows his place among the other campers, all of whom are at least distantly related to him, thus allowing Percy to broaden his idea of a traditional “family.” Percy reflects on how his identity fits into the idea of family, as Annabeth goes through similar struggles with her own parents. While this issue poses a struggle for them both in these first moments of their relationship, the shared experience will allow them to figure out their distinct identities as the story progresses.

