Mortenson’s daughter is born at home. She is named Amira Aliana (Amira means
					“female leader” in Persian and Aliana was the middle name of Mortenson’s sister).
					Mortenson learns that Jean Hoerni is dying of cancer, and he quickly returns to
					Korphe to record the completion of the school, as Hoerni very much wants to see
					pictures of the building. In Korphe, Mortenson uses his nursing skills to save the
					life of a village woman after she suffers from complications delivering her baby. He
					also confesses to Haji about his kidnapping and Haji advises him to let local people
					help in identifying the best places for new schools. Haji gives Mortenson a ledger
					in which the villagers kept careful track of how the school money was spent. When
					the last work is finished on December 10, 1996, the villagers celebrate completion
					of the school. Mortenson returns to America with the pictures and takes his family
					to Idaho, where Hoerni is in the hospital. Hoerni insists on tacking a picture of
					the school to the hospital wall. After Hoerni is moved back to Seattle, Mortenson
					goes there to stay with him. He nurses Hoerni until the end. Hoerni passes away on
					January 12, 1997, and Mortenson later delivers a eulogy at the memorial service.
					Hoerni leaves the CAI an endowment of $1 million to ensure that the organization is
					able to continue its work.

A surprise phone call notifies Mortenson that he is the subject of a
					fatwa, or religious indictment, issued by a cleric in the
					Braldu Valley. The cleric faults Mortenson for educating girls. Mortenson refuses to
					bribe the cleric and instructs Parvi to find a more powerful religious figure who
					will stand against the fatwa. Reluctantly, Mortenson leaves his family and returns
					to Pakistan, where he gathers all of his allies for a meeting. He is determined to
					quickly accomplish as much as possible, in case the fatwa succeeds and he is forced
					to leave Pakistan. He buys a Land Cruiser and launches new construction projects. In
					six months, Mortenson oversees the building of three new schools and the addition of
					rooms in existing schools that were overcrowded. He also sees to it that teachers at
					another school are paid. In Korphe, Sakina asks Mortenson for a place where the
					women can gather, and the CAI provides a Women’s Vocational Center for the village.
					It is equipped with sewing machines, and a tailor is brought in to help the women
					learn sewing and weaving. 

Mortenson has asked Jean Hoerni’s widow, Jennifer Wilson, to create a board of
					directors for the Institute, and at this point in the story a number of new
					supporters are introduced. One is Jennifer’s sister, Julia Bergman, a librarian who
					takes on the task of selecting culturally appropriate books for CAI schools. Another
					is Tara’s brother, Brent Bishop, a climber who helps Mortenson found Pakistan’s
					first mountaineering school. The school offers training for porters and includes a
					program to clean up some of the waste left by previous climbing expeditions.
					Mortenson adds his informal Pakistani staff to the CAI payroll and has a successful
					first meeting with the powerful Shiite cleric Syed Abbas. At the end of August,
					everyone—including Tara and Amira—gathers in Korphe for a celebration and dedication
					of the school. Jean Hoerni’s ashes are scattered into the Braldu River.

In Chapters 14 and 15, the early, developmental phase of Mortenson’s mission
					comes to an end and a more active phase begins. Everything begun so far reaches a
					climax in “Equilibrium.” Mortenson’s romance with Tara reaches a new level with the
					birth of their daughter. His role as Hoerni’s apprentice is completed when Mortenson
					becomes the caretaker and Hoerni acknowledges Mortenson as being like his own son.
					Mortenson subsequently becomes much more focused, and in “Mortenson in Motion” we
					see how he expands and intensifies his mission. Accordingly, the two chapters have
					different tempos. The language and tone of “Equilibrium” move slowly and
					deliberately, while “Mortenson in Motion” goes at a quick pace, rapidly introducing
					and re-introducing characters and building a catalog of accomplishments. The plot in
					these chapters begins with a birth, continues through Hoerni’s death, and concludes
					with a celebration of life at the inauguration of the Korphe school. 

Many of the events in the section revolve around Jean Hoerni, though Hoerni
					himself appears only intermittently. Hoerni’s imminent death prompts Mortenson’s
					early return to Pakistan, and spurs Mortenson on to complete the school. Hoerni also
					plays an important role to Mortenson personally. He becomes Mortenson’s last
					patient, giving Mortenson a feeling of closure about his former nursing career. At
					the same time, Hoerni opens the door to Mortenson’s future by leaving a substantial
					amount of money to the CAI. We see a different dimension to Hoerni’s gruff persona
					just before his death, when he insists on going home for a few hours to send flowers
					to old friends. In Chapter 15, Hoerni’s gift continues to bear fruit as Mortenson
					ramps up the aid program in Pakistan. Finally, in a symbolic act near the chapter’s
					end, Mortenson pours Hoerni’s ashes into the waters of the Braldu.

“Mortenson in Motion” is, in its action, a quick catalog of people and events.
					On a deeper level, however, it examines the potential for unity. There are three
					pivotal scenes, beginning with the meeting in the Indus hotel. Mortenson has
					gathered all of his Pakistani allies around one table, and we have the opportunity
					to meet again with old acquaintances like Mouzafer and Ghulam Parvi. We also meet
					new people who have joined the mission. Mortenson sees the camaraderie around the
					table as an indication that unity is possible, even among differing ethnic and
					religious groups. Later, he meets Syed Abbas at a gas station, and although the
					encounter is brief, it is another important indication that there can be
					understanding between Muslims and non-Muslims. In the final scene, people from all
					over Pakistan converge on Korphe for a celebration, and they are joined by a diverse
					group of Americans. The school has become a symbol of how cooperation and compromise
					can lead to accomplishment.

Chapter 15 additionally depicts the growth of the CAI into a full-fledged
					organization and the radical expansion of Mortenson’s vision. At the start of his
					project, Mortenson feels driven by his promise to Korphe, and he does not look
					further than a single school. After he gains support and his financial resources
					grow, he considers building more schools, then begins thinking about other aspects
					of education, such as expanding existing schools and paying teachers. As he connects
					with other people, he becomes aware of additional opportunities and responds
					quickly. For example, the women of Korphe introduce an idea that he had not
					considered—a place for women to gather. Once he sees the value of this notion, he
					decides that every CAI school should include a Women’s Vocational Center in the
					future. By the end of the year described in Chapter 15, the mission has grown to
					include not only the climbing school that had been discussed many months before, but
					also an environmental program that will remove waste left behind by careless
					visitors to K2. Thus the celebration in Korphe marks both the completion of
					Mortenson’s original mission and the expansive possibilities that have grown out of
					his impulsive promise.

