A new patient arrives named Alice Calais. She pronounces
					her last name “callous,” which surprises some of the girls, who
					expected the French pronunciation “callay.” Alice is startlingly
					naive and shocks Kaysen when she admits to never having tasted honey.
					One day, Alice suffers some sort of mental collapse and is taken
					to the maximum-security ward by a pair of nurses. Curious, several
					of the girls decide to visit Alice on her new ward, which is markedly
					different from their own. Bars obscure every window, and there are
					no doors or seats in the bathroom. The patients’ rooms appear just
					like the seclusion room in Kaysen’s ward—empty except for a mattress. Alice
					has smeared herself and the walls of her cell with feces. Alice’s appearance
					and total change in character repulses the girls, who quickly decide
					to leave. The nurses are slow to let them out, and Kaysen begins
					to panic. Lisa lights a cigarette, prompting immediate attention
					from the staff. Once back on their own ward, the girls discuss the
					likelihood that any of them could end up like Alice. “Don’t let
					it,” says Georgina. “Don’t forget it.”

Kaysen recalls time spent with her therapist, Melvin,
					whom she likes. His presence is calming, although he annoys Kaysen
					with vague questions and answers. Kaysen objects to the therapist’s
					comment that she is confused based on the simplistic observation
					that she is eighteen and confined to a mental hospital. The therapist arrives
					to his appointment with Kaysen one day in a sports car, which prompts
					her to remark that he usually drives a station wagon or a sedan.
					She draws a parallel between Freud’s depiction of the division of
					the psyche into three parts—the ego, the superego, and the id—and
					the therapist’s three cars. Something about her observation leads
					the therapist to suggest that Kaysen enter analysis, a more rigorous
					kind of therapy. Once Kaysen’s analysis program begins, Melvin arranges
					for her to have grounds privileges at the hospital, enabling her
					to travel around the property without an escort. Kaysen discovers
					a series of tunnels under the hospital grounds that nurses use to
					move the patients around during bad weather. Kaysen loves the odor
					and silence of the tunnels, and the way that they connect the entire
					hospital, undetected by those above ground. Melvin suggests that
					Kaysen likes the tunnels because they resemble a womb. Kaysen rejects
					his explanation. She sees the tunnels as an echo of Plato’s theory
					that everything we see in this world is simply a copy of its ideal
					form. Kaysen later finds out that she is Melvin’s first analysis
					patient, and she resolves not to continue to engage in the sort
					of mental games he favors.

McLean Hospital’s address is well known in Massachusetts,
					and patients are revealed to be mentally unstable if they ever disclose their
					address to anyone. The rude owner of a sewing store rejects Kaysen’s
					job application after discovering her history. She wonders is she
					will ever lead a conventional life after McLean, or if she is forever
					contaminated by her time at a psychiatric facility. Kaysen stops telling
					people about her hospital stay to avoid their probing questions.
					She begins to feel disgust for the mentally ill despite her familiarity
					with their plight and wonders whether people without her experience
					judge the insane even more harshly. 

Alice Calais’s condition conveys the horror and suddenness
					of certain types of mental illness. Alice’s initially calm demeanor
					quickly fades. Her feces-smeared cell and trembling figure allow
					the girls to gain perspective on their own illnesses. Suddenly the
					unhappy hallways of Kaysen’s ward appear cheery compared to the
					chicken wire, bare mattresses, and barred windows that comprise
					Alice’s maximum-security wing. Kaysen wonders whether she could
					ever end up in Alice’s condition. We know that Georgina’s resolve
					never to let it happen is inadequate; grave mental illness can overpower
					one’s will.

The tunnels beneath the hospital are an important symbol
					for Kaysen—an illustration of the difference between the essence
					of a thing and its copy, or “shadow.” Kaysen is first attracted
					to the tunnels because of their warmth and separation from the rest
					of the hospital. She has discovered an entire world to explore without
					obvious boundaries and rules. The lack of signs in the tunnels differs
					greatly from the hospital above, where every turn, hall, and room
					is clearly marked. Kaysen attempts to explain her attraction to
					the tunnels to her therapist by citing Plato. In The Republic,
					Plato describes his conception of the world using the shadows cast
					by a fire on the wall of a cave. Plato believes that the things
					we see are merely reproductions, or photocopies, of their ideal
					forms. Kaysen sees the tunnels as the “essence” of the hospital,
					stripped of all unnecessary detail. Similarly, Kaysen sees her time
					with her therapist as “messing about in the shadows,” ignoring the
					truth of her difficulties with trivial analyses.

Kaysen’s frustrating employment search underscores society’s prejudice
					toward and rejection of the unconventional. Her fears that she will
					be marked forever by her past seem unfortunately valid as she is
					turned away from one job after another. In a difficult admission,
					Kaysen confesses to feelings of disgust for the mentally ill. This is
					based on her fear that she will slide back into the ranks of the “crazy.”
					Kaysen learns to hide her history in a combination of secrecy and
					self-loathing. 

