“Nothing,” said he in the mirror, “I
						am only waiting. I am waiting for death.” 

“Where is death then?” 

“Coming,” said the other. 

Outside the Magic Theater, Pablo holds a small looking
					glass up to Harry. Harry sees the trembling reflection of a creature
					into which a man and wolf flow irregularly, each trying to destroy
					the other. Harry recognizes that this is how he sees himself, and
					that with Pablo’s help all of his soul will be made visible to him.
					Pablo leads Harry and Hermine into a horseshoe-shaped theater. He
					explains that victory over time is achieved through the dissolution
					of the personality. Pablo instructs Harry to walk down the left
					corridor while Hermine walks down the right. He shows Harry the
					pocket mirror again and tells him that the Magic Theater is a “school
					of humor.” Harry laughs, fully and with a feeling of wonderful release.
					The mirror chars, as though burned, and turns opaque.

Congratulating Harry and laughing the same eerie laugh
					from the end of the dance, Pablo tells Harry that the Magic Theater
					is a world of “pictures, not realities.” To cast aside the “spectacles”
					of his old personality, Harry looks into a gigantic mirror in which
					he sees infinite Harrys of all ages. One is a young teen who leaps
					out and runs down the corridor. Harry runs after the teen and stops
					with him at a door that reads “ALL GIRLS ARE YOURS—ONE QUARTER
						IN THE SLOT.” The boy disappears into the slot. Harry
					discovers everyone else has also disappeared, and he is left to negotiate
					the Magic Theater alone.

	Harry opens a door that reads “JOLLY HUNTING—GREAT HUNT
						IN AUTOMOBILES.” He finds himself in the middle of a war
					between men and machines. The scene is apocalyptic, filled with
					flames and death and reckless, gratuitous bloodshed. Gustav, Harry’s
					school friend, suddenly appears. Next, Harry opens a door that bears
					the words “GUIDANCE IN THE BUILDING UP OF THE PERSONALITY.
						SUCCESS GUARANTEED.” Inside, a man who looks like Pablo
					asks Harry to put the pieces of his personality on a chessboard,
					and shows him how to infinitely reconfigure them. When finished,
					Harry puts these wonderful pieces into his pocket.

The third door Harry chooses is marked “MARVELOUS
						TAMING OF THE STEPPENWOLF.” Inside, Harry watches a
					man humiliate a broken wolf by making it behave like a man. Harry
					is horrified to see the hungry wolf swallow chocolate while it is
					forced to put its paws around a rabbit and a lamb. Then man and
					wolf switch positions, and the man rips off his clothes and tears
					through the flesh of the rabbit and lamb as if he were a beast.
					In the fourth room Harry enters, “ALL GIRLS ARE YOURS,”
					he gets to enjoy all the women he has ever wanted in his life. Each
					one of these lovers readies him for his final encounter with Hermine.

	Finally, Harry stands in front of a door marked “HOW
						ONE KILLS FOR LOVE.” He is reminded of his early conversation
					with Hermine, when she told him she would give him a final command
					to kill her. Filled with dread, Harry reaches in his pockets for
					the pieces of his life so that he may rework them into a different
					conclusion. However, all he manages to fish out of his pocket is
					a knife. Harry runs away, back to the gigantic mirror, where he
					sees a wolf that turns into Harry. The reflection tells Harry that
					it is waiting for death.

Strains of the opera Don Giovanni and
					a peal of unearthly laughter herald the appearance of the composer
					Mozart, the person Harry most admires. The two discuss music and
					see Brahms and Wagner marching drearily below past them, dragging
					hosts of followers. Mozart does a somersault and laughs at Harry
					for being so despondent. Harry tries to catch Mozart’s pigtail,
					but it turns into the tail of a comet, which Harry follows into
					the cold atmosphere of immortals. Harry then passes out.

	When he comes to, Harry returns to the final door. He
					opens it to see Hermine and Pablo sleeping on the floor naked. Harry
					immediately thrusts the knife under Hermine’s left breast, the spot
					where Pablo has left a mark. Pablo awakes, smiles, hides Hermine’s
					wound with a corner of the rug, and leaves. Mozart enters, now in
					modern dress, and begins fixing a radio set. When Mozart turns on
					the radio, Harry is horrified that Mozart has sided with this terrible, modern,
					and mediocre bourgeois machine. Mozart laughs, explaining that the
					radio displays the battle between the real and the ideal, between
					humanity and divinity. Criticizing Harry for having done such a
					foolish thing as to kill Hermine, Mozart sends Harry to “HARRY’S
						EXECUTION.” In a bare yard enclosed by four walls, Harry
					is indicted for misusing the Magic Theater and for having no humor.
					A frightening, otherworldly laughter descends upon him.

	Harry comes to again, and Mozart is there to tell him
					that he cannot die. He says that Harry must live on to “listen to
					the cursed radio music of life” and that he must go on to “live
					and to learn to laugh.” When Harry threatens refusal, Mozart offers
					Harry a cigarette and suddenly transforms into Pablo. Pablo, referring
					to Hermine, is disappointed that Harry has made such a mess of the
					Magic Theater. Pablo picks up Hermine, who shrinks into a toy figure,
					and packs her into his waistcoat pocket.  Pablo tells Harry that
					he will do better the next time.

	At this point, Harry understands everything. He understands that
					“all the hundred thousand pieces of life’s game were in [his] pocket,”
					and he is determined to start the game anew. The novel closes with
					the optimistic words: “One day I would be a better hand at the game.
					One day I would learn how to laugh. Pablo was waiting for me, and
					Mozart too.”

I understood it all . . . . I knew that
						all the hundred thousand pieces of life’s game were in my pocket. 

The episode of the Magic Theater questions the boundary
					between life and art. The worlds Harry discovers inside the doors
					are highly stylized representations that match up to an emotional
					or psychic reality rather than depicting a physical reality. They
					remind us of theatrical arts as well as visual ones: Harry is in
					a theater, and his actions are actually a performance. Pablo himself
					declares that the Magic Theater is a place of pictures rather than
					reality. We are entirely in the realm of art or magic. Critic Ralph
					Freedman suggests that the scenes behind the doors symbolize the
					transformation of life into art, and that the mirror of art transforms
					what is ambivalent in real life into images and motifs. Freedman
					argues that Hesse’s sense of being both wanted and rejected is manifest
					in Harry’s “pilgrimage among alternating motifs: those depicting
					pleasure, a unified vision, humor, or transcendence contrasted with
					others which depict isolation, failure, betrayal, and despair.”

	The Magic Theater scene clarifies the importance of laughter,
					one of the novel’s key concerns. From the start, Pablo explains
					that the Magic Theater is a school of humor. Pablo laughs constantly
					and encourages Harry to laugh at his own personality and life. When Harry
					encounters Mozart, the composer also states that Harry takes life
					too seriously, and he laughs the beautiful laughter of the immortals.
					In this regard, Mozart resembles the jocund Goethe of Harry’s dream
					at the Black Eagle.

The nature of the laughter that these characters discuss,
					however, is complex. It is not the kind of laughter that results
					from a propensity to see the sunny side of life. Rather, in Steppenwolf laughter
					is seen as a response not to the amusing but to the dreadful. The
					laughter of the immortals belongs to them because it transcends
					the dramas and worries of human life. Though Harry does not learn
					the lessons of the school of humor right away, at the end of the
					novel he optimistically believes that he will.

	Harry’s determination to try to learn how to laugh suggests
					that a great, transcendent life is not out of mortal reach. Indeed,
					in much of the Magic Theater episode, Hesse laughs at his own writing
					in the same way that his characters suggest Harry should laugh at
					his life. Hesse’s painfully earnest story of a tortured, gifted
					man may make the author seem humorless. But there is a strong element
					of self-mockery in the Magic Theater episode that reveals Hesse’s
					sense of humor. 

Hesse’s self-mockery is most obvious in the embedded titles
					of some of the doors in the Magic Theater. Doors along the corridor promise
					things such as “delightful suicide,” “the wisdom of the East,” “transformation
					from time into space by means of music,” “downfall of the West,”
					“laughing tears,” and “solitude made easy.” These titles are a catalog
					of Hesse’s own obsessions, the ideas that appear throughout Steppenwolf and
					Hesse’s other works. That Hesse can list his obsessions so plainly
					shows that he is fully aware of his own inclinations. Furthermore,
					the fact that Hesse reduces his obsessions to unceremonious phrases,
					thrown out helter-skelter in the fantastic Magic Theater, is an
					indication that he can laugh at them, that he does not take them
					too seriously. The door titles imply subtly that Hesse has arrived
					at a fuller reconciliation of his own multiple selves and has learned
					the lesson of humor that Harry glimpses at the novel’s conclusion.

