Jesse steals a dump truck and picks up Dan. In flashbacks, Jesse recalls when
					he was eleven and received a skateboard as a “guilt gift,” meaning a gift his
					parents gave him whenever Kate became seriously ill. Brian promised him he would
					take him to a parking lot where he could ride it, but Kate’s nose started to bleed.
					When Jesse reminded Brian of his promise, Brian looked at Jesse like he didn’t see
					him. That day, Jesse walked into the middle of traffic, hoping to get noticed. In
					the present, Jesse takes Dan to a shed. Jesse lights it on fire and admires his
					work, until Dan tells him that a homeless man named Rat lives in there. Jesse runs
					in to the burning shed, saves Rat, and runs away just as the fire trucks
					arrive.

Anna waits at the hospital with Kate and Sara. Kate feels alert, but Dr.
					Chance cautions that Kate’s lucid moments will occur less and less frequently
					because she is in end-stage renal failure. Kate asks Dr. Chance how long it will be
					before she dies, and he tells her maybe a week. Sara begins crying. When Anna tells
					her to stop, Sara looks at Anna and tells her to stop. Later at the fire station,
					Anna talks to Julia about her crush, Kyle, and Julia asks Anna what it will be like
					when Kate dies. Anna can’t answer. Sara calls to apologize to Anna and say
					goodnight. On the roof that night, Anna and Brian talks about the stars and
					celestial navigation.

Brian goes to the hospital to see Sara. He talks to her about a trip they took
					to Nevada years ago. They saw a fortune teller who told Sara her life wouldn’t be
					good enough and told Brian to save himself. Sara doesn’t remember the trip and only
					wants to talk about Anna. Brian tells her he plans to speak on Anna’s behalf. Sara
					can’t understand this. She asks Brian to remember what it used to be like between
					them. But Brian knows Sara is not the same woman she used to be. He also knows he is
					not the same man he used to be, a man who believed Sara when she told him she would
					always love him.

In 2001, Anna asks for money for goaltender pads. She has started playing ice
					hockey. Four years have passed since Kate’s bone marrow transplant. One night, the
					family goes to watch Anna play hockey. Later, Kate wakes up bleeding badly. She has
					relapsed and her body is failing. Dr. Chance suggests a new and untested arsenic
					therapy. That night, Sara finds Brian writing Kate’s eulogy. He wants to bring Kate
					home to die in her own bed. He tells Sara the arsenic will just postpone what is
					coming. Sara tells him it’s not time.

Kate slips into a coma. Sara receives a call from Jesse’s school. He blew up a
					septic tank and has been expelled. Sara picks him up from the school and notices
					needle marks on his arms. She suspects drug use, but Jesse reveals he has been
					donating platelets for Kate every three days. Anna gets accepted to a prestigious
					hockey camp, but Sara tells her she won’t be able to go because they might need her
					for Kate. Anna says the camp is a year away, implying that Kate won’t be alive then
					anyway. Kate develops an infection and becomes seriously ill. Jesse and Anna say
					their good-byes to Kate. Brian tells Sara that Kate needs her permission to leave.
					As Sara tells Kate that it’s okay for her to go, Kate grips her hand and begins to
					claw her way back to life.

Anna ponders what heaven will be like. She wonders what age people are in
					heaven, and how anyone recognizes each other. Sara calls a meeting at Campbell’s
					office. She tells Anna that if Anna gives Kate a kidney she will never ask Anna for
					anything again. Anna hugs her mother but tells her she can’t do it. Without a word,
					Sara tries to smile and then leaves.

Julia admits to Izzy that she still has feelings for Campbell. Just then,
					Campbell arrives and asks Julia out to dinner to discuss Sara’s plea bargain. He
					takes her out on his boat, and though they’re having a good time, Julia suspects
					Campbell wants to sway her decision. Julia gets angry and wonders if Campbell ever
					says anything that isn’t a lie, but Campbell kisses her. She remarks that it feels
					like the most natural thing in the world.

The novel presents love, whether romantic or familial, as a complex and often
					contradictory emotion, and no relationships better exemplify this idea than Julia’s
					and Campbell’s relationship and Sara’s and Anna’s relationship. Julia, for instance,
					feels simultaneously attracted to and repelled by Campbell, largely because of how
					he treated her in the past. She asks Izzy if Izzy thinks she likes Campbell
					“because he’s an asshole or in spite of it.”
					At one point, Julia and Campbell go from arguing to kissing in a matter of seconds.
					In a similar manner, Sara can go from being extremely angry at Anna to being tender
					and caring in a short period. Often the people in both relationships wound each
					other deeply, as when Campbell stopped calling Julia, or when Anna filed her
					lawsuit. The characters in these relationships can hurt each other so much
					specifically because they love each other, not in spite of that
					fact.

Sara’s and Brian’s relationship reaches a breaking point in these chapters. In
					Brian’s memories of their trip to Nevada, we see a couple entirely different from
					the one we have seen throughout the novel. They are young, energetic, and very much
					in love. Currently, however, much of their relationship revolves around dealing with
					Kate’s cancer. Brian’s choice to support Anna also puts them for the first time in
					opposition with each other. Previously, Sara typically took the lead and convinced
					Brian to follow, as when she convinced him to see the fortune teller with her during
					their trip to Nevada. Now, however, Brian cannot be convinced. He believes Anna
					should be allowed to make her own decision about serving as Kate’s donor, leaving
					Sara feeling even more alone in her struggle to save Kate.

Brian’s wish to bring Kate home to die brings up another conflict in the
					story. Kate comes near death multiple times in the novel. Each time we see her
					suffering greatly. She bleeds profusely and slips into a coma, for instance. Because
					she has a terminal disease, the question does not seem to be whether she will die,
					but when. The struggle to prolong her life has put a great burden on every member of
					the family. Jesse and Anna do not have normal childhoods and regularly cannot do the
					things they want to do. Sara and Brian must care for Kate constantly and their
					marriage has suffered as a result, The greatest burden, however, falls on Kate
					herself, who must endure harsh treatments such as chemotherapy and suffers
					tremendously as the cancer destroys her body. If Sara and Brian bring Kate home, she
					will certainly die, ending her suffering. If she remains in the hospital, she may be
					able to go on living temporarily, but her suffering will continue and it remains
					only a matter of time before she will need to be hospitalized again. No perfect
					option exists, and we see Brian and Sara struggling to determine what would be best
					for Kate.

Despite his tough-guy persona, Jesse begins to emerge as one of the most
					vulnerable characters in the story. Even when he destroys things, he never intends
					to hurt anyone. When he sets the shack on fire and Dan tells him someone could be
					inside, Jesse runs in without a thought to his own safety. Although he blows up the
					school’s septic tank, we learn that he has been donating platelets for Kate. These
					actions suggest an internal conflict in Jesse’s character between impulses to
					destroy himself and to save others. Jesse’s self-destructive behavior stems
					specifically from his desire to be noticed by his parents, specifically Brian.
					According to Jesse’s description, when Jesse asked Brian to keep his promise and
					take Jesse to the parking lot to skate, Brian looked at Jesse like Jesse was “made
					out of smoke.” Jesse says for the first time he thought he might be, just meaning
					that he felt invisible. Immediately after, he ended up walking into traffic, just
					hoping to be noticed. Jesse’s desire to save others, meanwhile, appears to stem from
					his wish to save Kate and also from a wish to be like Brian, his father. When Jesse
					runs into the burning shack to save the homeless man that lives there, he
					unconsciously mirrors Brian, the firefighter.

