The freezing spell cast over Harry is broken, and he rushes
					down the stairs after Snape and Draco. Harry runs, dodging curses
					and bodies and hexing Amycus, who is trying to kill Ginny. Harry
					sees Ron, Professor McGonagall, and Lupin each battling a Death
					Eater. Harry sprints past his confused schoolmates toward Snape,
					Draco, and a large blond Death Eater. Harry sees Hagrid emerge from
					his cabin and attempt to stop the Death Eaters from fleeing the
					grounds. Harry is struck from behind by a curse and waits on the
					ground for his attackers to near. Harry strikes back, knocking them
					both down, then keeps running. Hagrid is fighting the blond Death
					Eater, and Snape and Draco are rushing toward the gates, where they
					will be able to Disapparate. Harry aims at Snape and misses. The
					blond Death Eater sets Hagrid’s house on fire. Snape tells Draco
					to keep running and turns to face Harry. Snape does not fight back,
					and Harry screams at him, calling him a coward. Harry is suddenly
					hit and falls over. He hears Snape’s voice shouting “No!” and telling Harry’s
					attacker that Harry is to be saved for the Dark Lord.

Harry no longer cares whether he lives or dies and staggers toward
					Snape, but Snape dodges his curses once more. Harry attempts a Levicorpus
					curse, but Snape deflects him. On the ground again, Snape moves
					toward Harry, crouching over his fallen body. Snape tells Harry
					that he, Snape, is the Half-Blood Prince, and that Harry should
					not use his own spells on him, as Harry’s father did. Harry dares
					Snape to kill him and calls him a coward once more. Snape stuns
					Harry and runs toward the gates, where he and Draco Disapparate.
					Harry struggles to sit up and yells for Hagrid. Hagrid rushes over
					and scoops Harry into his arms. Together, they use the Aquamenti
					spell to put out the fire in Hagrid’s house. Harry tells Hagrid
					that Snape killed Dumbledore. Hagrid does not believe Harry and
					leads him back to Hogwarts, where the students are assembling on
					the lawn, still unsure what has happened.

Hagrid spots the Dark Mark over the Astronomy Tower and notices
					a body lying in the grass—Dumbledore. Harry is silent as he straightens
					Dumbledore’s spectacles and wipes away the trickle of blood coming
					from his mouth. A crowd gathers behind Harry. Harry spots the locket
					they took from the cave, which has fallen from Dumbledore’s pocket,
					and he picks it up. The locket is not as large as Slytherin’s, nor
					does it bear his mark. When Harry opens it, he finds a small piece
					of parchment with a note written to Voldemort. The note’s author,
					who signs his or her name “R. A. B.,” tells Voldemort that he has
					discovered his secret, stolen the Horcrux, and intends to destroy
					it as soon as he can. The author tells Voldemort that he or she
					hopes that when Voldemort meets his match, he will simply be a mortal
					man. Harry does not understand the message, nor does he care. Harry
					only knows that whoever stole the real Horcrux contributed to Dumbledore’s
					death, causing him to weaken himself by drinking a horrible potion
					for nothing.

The freezing spell Dumbledore cast on Harry is broken
					when Dumbledore is killed, and Harry bursts into action immediately, doing
					his best to control the situation and prevent it from getting any
					worse. Once the reality of Dumbledore’s death seeps in, Harry stops
					caring whether he lives or dies, acting as if he has absolutely nothing
					left to lose. Now, Harry can think of nothing except stopping Snape
					and Draco and avenging the death of his beloved headmaster. He takes
					off after the pair without stopping to think about anything else.
					When Harry finally catches up with Snape, he does his best to cast
					a killing spell, but Snape consistently blocks his attempts. It
					almost seems as if Snape does not want Harry to become a murderer,
					just as Dumbledore did not wish for Draco to become a murderer.
					Snape never tries to kill Harry, even though he is given ample opportunity
					to do so. Instead, he continues blocking Harry’s spells and refuses
					to fight back.

Similarly, when another Death Eater attempts to strike
					Harry, Snape screams, “No,” and tells the attacker that Harry should
					be saved for Voldemort. Essentially, Snape saves Harry’s life. Moments later,
					when a Death Eater sets Hagrid’s house on fire, Harry’s sense of
					devastation grows even deeper. He cannot imagine also losing Hagrid,
					having lost Dumbledore just minutes earlier. At this point, Harry
					still does not know whether Ron and Hermione are safe and fears
					that every single person important to him is being taken away by
					Voldemort’s minions. In many ways, Harry hits rock bottom in Chapter 28,
					no longer appearing to care about the repercussions of his actions,
					thinking only about killing Snape and Draco Malfoy or, at the very
					least, preventing them from escaping. Hagrid refuses to believe
					that Dumbledore is dead, and it becomes clear that it is nearly
					impossible for anyone to imagine Hogwarts without its dear headmaster,
					Dumbledore.

When Harry finally retrieves the locket, he discovers
					that it is not, in fact, a Horcrux. Someone named R. A. B. has already
					retrieved the Horcrux and replaced it with a decoy, presumably working under
					the same motivation as Harry and Dumbledore. Although Harry reads
					the note, he does not seem to fully understand what it says and
					refuses to acknowledge that R. A. B. admits to destroying the Horcrux.
					All Harry can think about is how Dumbledore has sacrificed his own
					life for a fake locket, and that news is too troubling to bear.
					However, the note refers to both the destruction of the locket and
					Harry. When R.A.B speaks of Voldemort one day meeting his match,
					and being mortal when they face each other, it is clear that he
					or she is referring to Harry and hoping to help Harry in his quest
					to destroy Voldemort forever. Regardless, Harry is too distraught
					to bother thinking about the contents of the note, and all but ignores
					its sentiments.

