In the months following Quintana’s transfer to Rusk, Didion’s involvement
					in her daughter’s recovery process becomes less hands-on as Quintana’s
					health improves. Didion realizes that Quintana is almost at a point
					where she can recover on her own and realizes that she herself will
					need to do the same. She begins this process by attending to her
					unopened mail. It doesn’t occur to her at the time that she’s only
					just beginning the active process of mourning, which is different
					from the passive experience of grief. In the mail is Lives of
						‘
54
, a book compiling
					updates from John’s Princeton classmates in anticipation of their
					fiftieth reunion. She realizes that John had never told her much
					about Princeton, other than expressing his distaste for the Nassoons,
					and all-men’s singing group. Didion always laughed at John’s impression
					of a Nassoon, but now she anxiously seeks the lyrics for the song
					he used to parody. The only thing she can find online is an obituary
					for the song’s writer, John MacFayden, and Didion realizes she would
					give anything to be able to discuss the obituary with John.

A few nights before John passed away, he asked Didion
					if she was aware how many characters died in his new novel, Nothing
						Lost, and proceeded to make a list in faint handwriting
					on a legal pad. Didion wonders how long John had thought of himself
					as dead, remembering that in 1982 a doctor
					had told them that the divide between life and death was not black
					and white. They had been in the ICU with John’s niece, Dominique,
					who was on life support after being strangled to the point of death.
					For Didion at that moment, the divide between life and death was black
					and white, because even though Dominique could not survive off life
					support, she was still alive. In the months after Didion returned
					from Los Angeles, the abruptness of the shift between life and death
					was confirmed by the deaths of several close friends. Though each
					of these friends had suffered long illnesses, the deaths themselves
					were always final and abrupt.

Remembering that it once provided her with insight on
					“the divide” between life and death, Didion rereads the Greek drama Alcestis, which
					describes how Queen Alcestis dies, descends to the underworld, and
					then returns to Earth. After returning from the dead, Alcestis doesn’t
					speak. As she contemplates the reasons why, Didion wonders what
					would happen if John did, in fact, return from the dead, and how
					the experience of death would have changed him.

Later that summer, one of John’s Princeton classmates
					sends Didion a first edition copy of John’s novel True Confessions, which
					John had lent for an exhibition of books written by members of his
					class. The novel is dedicated to her and Quintana. She realizes
					that she had not sufficiently appreciated the dedication when she
					first learned of it—a theme that seems repetitive to her at this
					point. She rereads John’s books and comes across a scene from his
					memoir, Harp, in which John’s doctor tells him
					that he is a candidate for a “catastrophic cardiac event.” This
					warning is yet another example of something Didion didn’t appreciate
					at the time. After this diagnosis, several more tests were performed,
					leading to an extremely successful angioplasty. After the surgery,
					however, John remained convinced that he was going to die, while
					Didion believed that they had “fixed” the problem for good. She
					now realizes that John held the more realistic view.

Didion has reached a point in the mourning process where
					she can become a student of her own memory, piecing together bits
					of her past as a way of understanding the nature of her relationship
					with John and the ways that he anticipated his own death. Now that Quintana
					has begun the recovery process, Didion needs to begin her own recovery
					process, and she does so by opening the mail that had been neglected
					while she was in Los Angeles. Several pieces of mail open up old
					memories that Didion had dismissed or forgotten, but instead of
					finding herself giving in to the passive, overwhelming experience
					of the vortex effect, she actively engages with her memory. However,
					she still fixates, searching to remember, for example, the details
					of a private joke she had with John. The moment signals a change
					in the way that Didion engages with her memories of John. Up to
					this point, memory always overwhelmed her, bringing about the vortex
					effect that would leave her feeling anguished and disoriented. Enough
					time has passed now that she’s able to analyze her own memories,
					engaging in a rigorous examination that recalls her analysis of
					literature and psychological studies about grief.

Didion had always seen the line between life and death
					as clear and distinguishable, but as she analyzes her memories of
					John in the time leading up to his death, she comes to realize that
					he had prepared himself to die and, in many ways, already thought
					of himself as dead. For Didion, the division between life and death
					now grows hazy, and she starts to conceive of John’s death as a
					transition or passage rather than an abrupt change. Throughout the
					memoir, Didion has emphasized the notion of surprise and suddenness,
					noting time and time again that when John died he seemed to be there
					one moment and gone the next. In her previous encounters with death, she
					had also seen the change between living and dead as an abrupt one.
					The clear demarcation between the two states of existence is important
					for Didion, who usually sees the world in clear-cut terms. However,
					as she thinks back to John’s list of dead characters and his cardiologist’s
					warning, she realizes that John must have already been living with
					the expectation of his own death and begun to think of it in concrete
					terms. Though Didion had believed that the lines between life and
					death were clear and distinct, she begins to see that for John,
					the lines were blurred, and that his death may have not been so
					abrupt after all.

Didion comes to realize that the seeds of magical thinking
					had been planted years before John’s death, since she had dismissed John’s
					signs by wishing them away, optimistically believing that his doctors
					had taken care of his health problems. In retrospect, she sees that
					her lack of recognition of earlier signals was a failure on her part
					to appropriately appreciate the clues John provided and what they
					foretold. Just as she had failed to appreciate the dedication in his
					book, she had similarly failed to appreciate that the cause of his death
					had been named years before it happened. Before he died, Didion
					had already engaged in a kind of magical thinking wherein the inevitable
					consequence of John’s heart problem could be corrected by a medical
					procedure and the active attention of his doctors. John himself
					had known that, no matter what happened, there was an inevitable
					outcome that could not be prevented, only delayed.

