That school year, Reuven is elected president of his class.
					Although he and Danny still meet regularly on Shabbat afternoons,
					they never get around to discussing Freud. In the winter, the Germans
					launch a major offensive; everyone is preoccupied with the events
					of the war and with keeping track of American casualties. After
					several exciting rumors that the war is nearing an end, Danny catches
					the flu and is bedridden for a week.

	On a Thursday afternoon in April, Reuven learns that
					President Roosevelt has passed away. The news devastates Reuven.
					He had thought of FDR as being immortal, and he compares hearing
					the news of his death to hearing that God died. He returns home
					to listen to the radio with his teary-eyed father. Less than a week
					after Roosevelt’s death, Reuven comes home from school with a high fever
					and is bedridden for ten days. That May, Reb Saunders and Reuven’s
					father also become sick. They are both seriously ill when the world
					learns that the War in Europe has ended.

	At first everyone is joyous following the
					news of the surrender, but then the terrible reports of the German
					concentration camps shock and sadden the Jewish community. David
					Malter breaks down in tears, and Reuven is overwhelmed by the stories
					of destruction and devastation. Danny’s father talks wistfully of
					the Jewish world in Europe and of the brutal persecution Jews have experienced
					throughout history. The next Shabbat, Danny and Reuven meet with
					Danny’s father, but they do not study Talmud. Instead, Reb Saunders
					speaks mournfully about European Jewry and questions how God could
					let such terrible things happen. Reb Saunders’s conclusion, that
					everything must be a part of God’s will, is an answer neither Reuven
					nor his father can accept. David Malter tells Reuven that it is
					up to Jews in America to preserve Jewish tradition, now that Hitler
					has destroyed most Jewish culture in Europe.

	After Reuven’s final exams that year, his father suffers
					a heart attack. In the first few frightening days following the
					episode, Reuven is cared for by Manya, the Malters’ housekeeper,
					but soon Reb Saunders invites Reuven to live with him while Reuven’s
					father recovers in the hospital. On the first day of July, Reuven
					moves into Danny’s room.

The Saunderses treat Reuven like a member of
					the family. Danny’s mother constantly heaps food on his plate, and
					Danny’s sister jokingly teases the boys, calling them David and
					Jonathan, the inseparable biblical pair. Levi Saunders, Danny’s
					brother, floats around the house, sickly and silent. Most perplexing, Danny’s
					father broods constantly and occasionally breaks into tears for
					no apparent reason. 

Danny and Reuven spend all their time together. They finally have
					the discussions they were unable to have during the busy school
					year. Danny patiently explains Freud to Reuven, and Reuven is astounded
					by the depth of Danny’s knowledge and by the unsettling nature of
					Freud’s theories.

	During Reuven’s visits to his father in the hospital,
					Mr. Malter speaks passionately about the need to build a Jewish
					homeland in Palestine. One morning, Reuven raises the topic of Zionism
					with Reb Saunders. Reb Saunders flies into a rage and screams that
					the activities of the secular Zionists are sacrilegious because
					it is profane to build a Jewish home in Israel before the arrival
					of the Messiah. Danny tells Reuven that if Reb Saunders knew of
					David Malter’s Zionist beliefs, he would throw Reuven out of the
					house. Reuven never mentions the topic again in front of Reb Saunders,
					and Reb Saunders seems to forget the incident.

	A few weeks later, while Reuven and Danny
					are studying in the library together, Danny confesses that one of
					the main reasons he worries about his brother Levi’s health is that
					he wants Levi to take over his father’s Hasidic dynasty so that
					he himself can study psychology. Danny remarks that the day he breaks
					this news to his father, he will need to have Reuven nearby for
					support. Reuven tries to change the subject by coyly mentioning Danny’s
					sister. Danny quietly and peremptorily informs his friend that his
					sister was promised in marriage at the age of two, and the subject
					is never discussed between them again.

	In August, Reuven and his father again go to their cottage
					near Peekskill, where his father recovers from his illness. That
					month, the United States drops atomic bombs on Japan, and the war
					with Japan ends. That fall, Reuven and Danny enter Hirsch College,
					and Danny begins to wear glasses.

In Chapter 11, Potok alternates
					between personal and historical tragedies, showing suffering to
					exist on both an individual and a societal level. The news of the
					German offensive is followed by news of Levi’s illness. As the war
					in Europe intensifies, Danny falls sick with the flu. Roosevelt’s
					death is followed by Reuven’s fever, and David Malter’s and Reb
					Saunders’s illnesses. Then the terrible revelation of the concentration
					camps is followed by David Malter’s heart attack. Although the historical
					tragedies do not directly cause the characters’ illnesses, Potok
					links historical events to plot developments to demonstrate that
					World War II is not merely a backdrop for the novel, but an integral
					force in its characters’ lives.

	Following the news of President Roosevelt’s death, Reuven directly
					states one of the novel’s themes for the first time. He makes a
					connection between Roosevelt’s death and Billy’s blindness, saying
					that both events are “senseless” and “empty of meaning.” Later in
					the chapter, the discovery of the concentration camps exponentially
					amplifies this feeling that the world is full of senseless suffering.
					The news of the Holocaust leads Reuven—as well as all other Jews—to
					question faith and religion.

	Each of the novel’s characters reacts differently to
					the challenge the Holocaust poses to believing in an all-knowing,
					ever-present God. Upon learning of the concentration camps, both
					David Malter and Reb Saunders weep for the loss of millions of European
					Jews. However, Reb Saunders accepts the Holocaust as God’s will
					and, according to a strict and conservative interpretation of Jewish
					tradition, feels that Jews must wait for the Messiah to come to
					lead them to the Promised Land. Mr. Malter, on the other hand, argues
					that Jews cannot wait for God any longer; they must rebuild Jewry
					in America and found a Jewish state in Palestine. Although both
					men are deeply and profoundly pained by the mass extermination of
					the Jewish people, their political responses are radically different.
					Reb Saunders looks to Jewish tradition and its prophecy for comfort, while
					David Malter would rather create a new homeland than wait for the
					promises of a tradition—a tradition that the horror of the Holocaust
					calls into question.

	In Chapter 12, Reuven’s experience
					of living with the Malter family deepens his and our perception
					of Reb Saunders as a character. He relates that Reb Saunders randomly
					bursts into tears and walks as though there is “some kind of enormous
					burden on his shoulders.” These mysterious moments suggest that
					Reb Saunders isn’t as certain of his beliefs and actions as he appears
					to be.

	Both Reuven and Danny share the burden of being Jews,
					of being part of the “chosen people” by virtue of their birth. In
					Danny’s conversation with Reuven about feeling “trapped,” Danny
					discusses how he also feels the burden of being chosen to succeed
					his father. He asks Reuven if he knows what it is like to feel trapped,
					and Reuven replies, somewhat hesitantly, that he does not. That
					Danny feels such a greater burden than Reuven suggests that the
					novel is more about conflict between fathers and sons than about
					conflict with religion and tradition. Such a perspective, however,
					is too simple, because Danny’s problems with his father stem largely
					from issues of religion and tradition.

