At the end of The Mayor of Casterbridge, the
				ruined Michael Henchard wills that no one remember his name after
				his death. This request is profoundly startling and tragic, especially
				when one considers how important Henchard’s name has been to him
				during his lifetime. After committing the abominable deed of selling
				his wife and child, Henchard wakes from a drunken stupor and wonders, first
				and foremost, if he told any of the fair-goers his name. Eighteen years
				pass between that scene on the heath of Weydon-Priors and Henchard’s
				reunion with Susan in Casterbridge, but we immediately realize the
				value that Henchard places on a good name and reputation. Not only
				has he climbed from hay-trusser to mayor of a small agricultural
				town, but he labors to protect the esteem this higher position affords
				him. When Susan and Elizabeth-Jane come upon the mayor hosting a
				banquet for the town’s most prominent citizens, they witness a man
				struggling to convince the masses that, despite a mismanaged harvest,
				he is an honest person with a worthy name.

	As he stares out at an unhappy audience made up of grain
				merchants who have lost money and common citizens who, without wheat,
				are going hungry, Henchard laments that he cannot undo the past.
				He relates grown wheat metaphorically to the mistakes of the past—neither
				can be taken back. Although Henchard learns this lesson at the end
				of Chapter IV, he fails to internalize it. If there is, indeed,
				a key to his undoing, it is his inability to let go of his past mistakes.
				Guilt acts like a fuel that keeps Henchard moving toward his own
				demise. Unable to forget the events that took place in the furmity-woman’s
				tent, he sets out to punish himself again and again. While he might
				have found happiness by marrying Lucetta, for instance, Henchard
				determines to make amends for the past by remarrying a woman he
				never loved in the first place. Possessed of a “restless and self-accusing
				soul,” Henchard seems to seek out situations that promise further
				debasement. Although Donald Farfrae eventually appropriates Henchard’s
				job, business, and even his loved ones, it is Henchard who insists
				on creating the competition that he eventually loses. Although Henchard
				loses even the ability to explain himself—“he did not sufficiently
				value himself to lessen his sufferings by strenuous appeal or elaborate
				argument”—he never relinquishes his talent of endurance. Whatever
				the pain, Henchard bears it. It is this resilience that elevates
				him to the level of a hero—a man, ironically, whose name deserves
				to be remembered.

