Grant cannot find Vivian at the Rainbow Club. He sits
					at the bar and orders a drink. In a corner behind him, two mulatto
					bricklayers talk loudly, hoping Grant will overhear them. Grant
					finally catches a few of their words. They state loudly that Jefferson
					should have been executed long ago. Grant tries to contain
					himself, but after a few minutes he loses control. He walks over
					and tells them to be quiet. A fight breaks out, during which Grant
					is knocked unconscious.

When Grant wakes up, he finds himself in Vivian’s bedroom.
					He discovers that Claiborne, unable to stop the fight, knocked him
					out, and that Vivian brought him here to recover. Despite her disapproval
					of violence, Vivian softens and asks Grant to stay the night. He
					knows that he should not, since her husband could return to try to
					get the children. She tells Grant that she needs more from him than
					he currently gives her, that she wants more consideration. Angry,
					he walks out of the room and stands at the front door. He looks
					out through the screen and into the darkness. He does not want to
					go outside, for he realizes that everything he cares for is in Vivian’s
					house. After a few minutes, he returns to the kitchen and buries
					his face in Vivian’s lap.

Reverend Ambrose talks to Grant about Jefferson. He wants
					Grant to help him teach Jefferson about God, but Grant no longer
					believes in the church and refuses to help the reverend. Reverend
					Ambrose gets angry and raises his voice to Grant, calling him “boy”
					and telling him that he is uneducated because he does not know or
					understand people. Grant says he cannot lie to Jefferson by pretending
					to believe in heaven or the Bible. Reverend Ambrose says he knows Grant
					looks down on him for lying, and he admits that he does lie in order
					to relieve people’s pain, but he says that people lie to themselves
					and to others in order to make life bearable. He tells Grant that
					Tante Lou has been lying to him all her life, telling herself and Grant
					she was fine when truly she was working her fingers to the bone
					in order to send him to college.

When Grant next goes to visit Jefferson, he sees the notebook
					on the floor, next to the radio. He opens the notebook and finds
					that Jefferson has filled up three-quarters of the first page, though
					he clearly erased a great deal. He has written about dying, and
					about the difference between men and hogs. Grant asks him about
					Reverend Ambrose’s last visit. Jefferson says Ambrose told him to
					pray, but that he does not pray because he doesn’t know if heaven
					exists. Jefferson asks Grant if he prays and Grant replies honestly,
					saying he doesn’t because he doesn’t believe in anything. Grant
					says he feels lost. He tells Jefferson that he wants Jefferson to
					believe in something so that someday Grant can look to Jefferson
					as an example and start believing in something himself.

	Jefferson says that Reverend Ambrose told him to give
					up his possessions, which confuses Jefferson because he has so few
					possessions to give up. Grant says Jefferson may not have possessions,
					but he still has love to give. Jefferson says that everyone asks
					him to bear a cross, but no one ever bore his cross. Jefferson asks
					if Miss Emma or even Grant would go to the chair to save him. When
					Jefferson asks if Grant believes in God, Grant says he does. Jefferson
					says he wants to go to his death wordlessly, as Christ did. He talks
					of his execution, saying Grant asks too much of him. Jefferson says
					that he moved through his life working and grinning to get by, pandering
					to the whites, doing what he thought God asked of him, and now the people
					around him want him to change entirely. When Grant lowers his
					head, Jefferson accuses him of not being able to look at him. Grant looks,
					and sees Jefferson standing tall, not stooped. Jefferson asks Grant
					how the execution will feel. Grant continues to avert his gaze from
					Jefferson, but accepts a sweet potato when Jefferson offers it.

In these chapters, Grant becomes not teacher but student.
					Grant is lost and needs Jefferson’s help, as he admits to Jefferson.
					Grant also admits to the reverend that he is lost. Reverend Ambrose
					says he himself is found, for he understands that the black community
					needs the church in order to bear life in the racist South. Ambrose
					also says that lying is necessary in order to make life endurable
					and to help others, like Grant, make progress in the world. Here
					Ambrose changes his tactics slightly. Before, he challenged Grant
					solely on religious grounds, insulting him as a secular teacher.
					Now he talks not just about faith in God, but about kindness to
					friends and family. This argument seems to reach Grant. In addressing
					these subjects, Ambrose highlights the absurdity facing the black community—namely,
					the fact that the community must continually compromise its own
					sense of ethical behavior—honesty—in order to survive in an unethical
					and racist world. Ambrose’s emphasis on lying attracts Grant because
					he too has had to lie in the past—for instance, when he lied to
					Miss Emma about Jefferson’s aggression. Grant can identify with
					Ambrose’s words here and even puts them into practice. When he speaks
					to Jefferson in Chapter 28, Grant tries to
					persuade him to believe in religion whether Jefferson believes it
					will be good for his soul or not.

	Jefferson begins teaching Grant to stop wallowing in
					his own pain and fear. Whereas Jefferson once lay mute on his bed
					and refused to talk, now he continually confronts Grant, demanding
					to know whether Grant has faith in heaven and God, and whether the people
					who want Jefferson to die for them would die for Jefferson. Grant
					has difficulty answering these questions and lowers his head in shame
					because he cannot bear to look at Jefferson. Jefferson confronts Grant
					about this reaction too, telling him that he should look at him. Jefferson’s
					posture marks his change: he stands up straight now. Jefferson’s
					relationship to food shows the change too; before he refused to eat
					when others offered him food, but now he offers food to Grant. He acts
					as Grant should act, lifting his head up and being brave. 

	Vivian also teaches Grant, showing him that he lacks
					consideration for other people and that his cynicism conveniently
					allows him to isolate himself and avoid dealing with other people’s
					pain. Grant claims to love Vivian, but he focuses attention on his
					own life, not on hers. He thinks of her not as a person with needs
					of her own, but as his distraction, his means of obtaining comfort,
					and his haven in times of distress. Vivian’s personal life is merely
					a nuisance to Grant, a source of complications and obstacles. Vivian
					seldom speaks in the novel—which reflects Grant’s minimal interest
					in her—but here she asserts herself and breaks into Grant’s world.
					Grant tells her, “That’s not you talking, honey,” as if he understands
					her better than she does herself. Vivian replies, “Who is me?”
					in order to emphasize the fact that Grant does not truly know her.
					She forces him to decide whether or not he wants to pay real attention
					to her. By burying his head in her lap, Grant agrees to do what
					Vivian asks.

