David is a strong but unassuming shepherd who becomes
				God’s choice to replace Saul as king of Israel. He is humble yet
				self-possessed, readily dismissing human opinion. His humility becomes clear
				early in his youth, when he kills the giant Goliath with a sling stone,
				declining the opportunity to use Saul’s royal armor. As king, his
				foremost quality is obedience to God. For example, when his wife
				expresses embarrassment at David’s dancing while he marches into
				Jerusalem, he rebukes her, boasting that he will embarrass himself
				so long as it pleases God.

David’s mercy to others displays his selflessness—a
				product of his strenuous commitment to ethical ideals. His sense
				of propriety is striking when he refrains from killing Saul while
				Saul has his back turned. David scorns the easy opportunity to attack
				because he feels it would be morally wrong to strike God’s current
				anointed ruler. As king, David forgives the kingdom’s traitors,
				and executes the traitors of his enemies. When his own rebellious
				son dies, David cries aloud in public, “O my son Absalom, my son,
				my son Absalom!” (2 Samuel 18:33).
				His weeping suggests the depth of a father’s blind love for his
				son.

David’s mercy may also be interpreted as a product of
				his political aspirations. David refuses to kill Saul because he
				senses that whatever standards he imposes against the current king
				may one day be used against himself as ruler. Moreover, seeds of
				revolt have already been planted in the northern tribes of Israel
				by David’s reign, and the kingdom’s unity may be on shaky ground.
				King David shows mercy to his traitors, especially Absalom, because
				he wishes to quell emotions and court the graces of all his subjects.
				By this reading, David appears to be a pragmatist—one who acts not
				out of his or her ideals, but on the basis of what is practical
				or expedient. However, the Old Testament ultimately seems to suggest
				that David’s religious ideals do not conflict with his pragmatism.

