Reverend Hightower muses on his past and the lives of
					his father and grandfather. His grandfather was a slave-owning lawyer
					who understood neither his son’s abolitionist stance nor his desire,
					from his teen years, to preach to rural congregations. When Hightower’s father
					was married, his grandfather ceded the house and property to his
					son. Hightower’s father went off to fight in the Civil War, but
					he did not empathize with the South’s cause and never fired a gun
					during the entire four years of his service. Instead, he learned
					to be a medic and became a doctor at the end of the conflict. Hightower’s grandfather
					was killed during a raid on Jefferson during the war; Hightower
					remembers, as a boy, looking at his grandfather’s gray Confederate
					uniform with its mysterious blue patch.

Hightower was raised in the presence of these phantoms
					of the past—his father, mother, grandfather, and the slave woman
					his grandfather had owned until the war. Hightower entered the seminary
					and later married, intent on being given a church in Jefferson. Eventually,
					this goal did come to pass. Hightower then muses on his wife’s indiscretions
					and his own fall from grace, wondering whether he used his wife
					as means of gaining a foothold in the town of Jefferson. As his
					thoughts race ahead, Hightower sees the faces of those who constitute
					his world and sees the “other” face of Christmas, the goodness in
					it, that had lain hidden from the world for so long. Hightower feels
					he is dying as he imagines he hears the thundering cavalry charge
					of his grandfather’s company sweeping by.

A furniture dealer tells his wife of an incident that
					occurred during a recent trip to Mississippi. He recalls how he
					met Byron, Lena, and the baby, who are in search of a ride to no
					specific destination—just farther down the road. When they stop
					for the night, the couple asks to sleep in the bed of the truck.
					Around the campfire, the man learns that the baby is not Byron’s
					and that the couple is searching for another, unnamed man. When
					it comes time to go to sleep, Lena climbs into the truck. When Byron
					tries to climb in beside her, she spurns his advances and sends
					him off by the fire. Instead, Byron disappears and does not return
					the next morning. Calmly, Lena packs up and continues along with
					the driver. Eventually, Byron appears beside the road, and the truck
					slows to pick him up. Riding side by side, two wanderers, not necessarily
					searching for anyone or anything, travel deeper and deeper into
					Tennessee. Lena muses that she has been farther in the past two
					months than in her entire life up to that point.

In a symbolic gesture of acceptance and return, Hightower
					assists Lena when she goes into labor. By this simple act, he is
					finally able to reach out beyond his parochial, self-contained world
					and “minister” to a member of the community in need. Despite the
					beatings and the scorn visited on him, despite the struggle for
					self-acceptance, he finally reclaims the dignity and pride that
					eluded him and is finally able to make peace with his troubled past.
					Through Hightower’s subsequent musings on and recollections of his
					family history, Faulkner widens the scope of his inquiry to take
					in the powerful historical forces that have gripped and shaped the
					South. In a novel whose main characters are haunted and dogged by
					their personal pasts, the pressure and influence of a commonly shared
					historical past is often overlooked. Faulkner thus gives the inherent schism
					that divides Hightower—and the other characters—yet another dimension
					and source.

Just as there is no one definable cause of Joe Christmas’s
					troubled existence, nor is there one for Hightower’s troubles; instead,
					a complex combination of influences emerges. The South’s historical
					past, fraught with division and bloodshed, is only one of many spheres shaping
					the unstable present with which the characters are saddled. Hightower’s
					inherently divided self can be traced in part to his forebears—in
					particular his father, who fought for the Confederacy in the Civil
					War despite being strongly opposed to Southern principles and never
					firing his gun in battle. Hightower views this basic dichotomy as
					“proof enough that [his father] was two separate and complete people,
					one of whom dwelled by serene rules in a world where reality did
					not exist.” Hightower thus finds familial and historical sources
					to explain—at least in part—his own duality, disunity, and emotional
					unrest. He is emblematic of the individual who is framed and contextualized
					by society while at the same time outside its influence—the individual
					who consciously and unconsciously absorbs and deflects the historical
					and social forces surrounding him.

The novel’s final chapter marks another departure. With
					Miss Burden and Christmas dead, and Reverend Hightower sliding slowly
					into the grip of his own death, Jefferson is vacated. The focus shifts
					again to the wanderings of Lena. As is fitting for the novel’s cyclical
					nature—its inherent structure of repetition and variation—she is
					once again on the road, only this time joined by her newborn and
					Byron. Perhaps the most notable aspect of the novel’s conclusion,
					though, is that it is narrated by a new presence, a nameless furniture
					dealer who has picked up the ragtag hitchhiking family in its quest
					to get to Tennessee. This gesture—this addition of yet another character
					essentially tangential to the narrative—is Faulkner’s final commentary
					on the chorus of voices that have collectively formulated the backdrop
					of his characters’ lives and personal struggles. What remains in
					the end are those who turn from experience and those who actively
					seek it. Rather than resist a rootless, itinerant, and still-to-be-defined
					life, Lena welcomes her wandering, her ongoing search for her place
					in the world despite the suffering and challenges she may meet along
					the way. Rather than fight this fate, as Joe Christmas did, she
					embraces it, heading into the unknown future with a new life and
					a new love in tow.

