Harry, Ron, and Hermione receive a tear-stained letter
					from Hagrid announcing Aragog’s death and requesting their presence
					at his funeral. They decide it’s too dangerous to travel outside
					of Hogwarts at night. Ron tells Harry that he should try using Felix
					Felicis to acquire Slughorn’s memory, and Hermione agrees. Ron and
					Hermione head off to Hogsmeade for their Apparition tests. Hermione passes
					her exam, but Ron doesn’t. After dinner, Harry takes a gulp of Felix
					Felicis, and a warm glow fills him. Harry puts on his Invisibility
					Cloak, telling his friends he’s decided to go to Hagrid’s. Harry heads
					toward Hagrid’s, running into Slughorn on the way. Harry explains
					about Aragog and Hagrid. Slughorn tells Harry that the venom of
					an acromantula is extremely rare and almost impossible to gather.
					Harry invites Slughorn to the funeral. Harry, Hagrid, and Slughorn
					step into Hagrid’s backyard, where a grave has been dug. While Hagrid
					is crying, Slughorn approaches the giant spider and collects a bottleful
					of venom. After Aragog is buried, they sit down for drinks.

Harry senses that he should abstain from drinking too
					much, and nonverbally casts a Refilling Charm, making sure Slughorn
					and Hagrid’s glasses stay full. Hagrid and Slughorn continue to
					drink heavily. Harry tells Slughorn about the pain of his mother
					and father dying so young and reminds Slughorn of how much he liked
					Harry’s mother, Lily. Harry tells a very drunk Slughorn that the
					only way to stop Voldemort is to give Harry the true memory. Slughorn
					tells Harry he is not proud of what it contains, but he hands it
					over anyway. Harry feels the Felix Felicis wearing off and walks
					back to the castle. Dumbledore is delighted with Harry’s success
					and empties Slughorn’s memory into the Pensieve. This time, there
					is no fog or loud voices. When Voldemort asks about Horcruxes, Slughorn explains
					that a Horcrux is an object in which a person has concealed part
					of their soul. Even if the person is attacked or destroyed, a small part
					of his soul lives on outside of his body—and therefore he can never
					die. Slughorn goes on to explain that very few would want that kind
					of existence, and that death is often preferable. Splitting one’s
					soul is an unnatural violation and can only occur when one commits
					the supreme act of evil, murder.

Slughorn tells Voldemort not to repeat anything he has
					just heard, and the memory ends. Dumbledore tells Harry that he
					suspects Voldemort has split his soul into seven pieces, and that
					no wizard has ever attempted multiple Horcruxes. The only way to
					kill Voldemort is to destroy all seven Horcruxes. Dumbledore believes that
					the seventh Horcrux is Voldemort’s regenerated body and should be
					destroyed last. Of the other six, two are already gone—the diary
					Harry obliterated his first year at Hogwarts, and Marvolo’s ring,
					which Dumbledore withered his hand destroying. Harry suggests Slytherin’s
					locket and Hufflepuff’s cup. Dumbledore wonders if one of the remaining
					two Horcruxes belonged to Ravenclaw, since Gryffindor’s only known
					relic, the sword, is safe in Dumbledore’s office. Dumbledore believes
					that Nagini, the snake, is the sixth. It is revealed that when Dumbledore
					leaves Hogwarts for long stretches of time, he is out hunting for
					Horcruxes. Dumbledore thinks he is close to finding another, and
					tells Harry that he can come along to help destroy it. Dumbledore
					reminds Harry that his ability to love makes him a great and powerful
					wizard, explaining that this capacity for love is the only thing
					that has kept him from being lured to the Dark Arts.

Chapters 22 and 23 contain
					some of the most significant moments in the Harry Potter
						and the Half-Blood Prince, as Harry and Dumbledore finally
					unlock the secret to defeating Voldemort. After weeks of putting
					it off, Harry finally manages to coerce the necessary memory out
					of Slughorn. Harry uses a combination of alcohol and guilt, invoking
					his mother’s memory and playing on Slughorn’s admitted fondness
					for her, miraculously managing to get Slughorn to give up the true
					memory. Ironically, Harry does this by using the Felix Felicis potion
					Slughorn himself made and gave to Harry as a reward. Even though
					Slughorn realizes that the memory will reveal what Slughorn actually
					told Voldemort about Horcruxes and will destroy his reputation in
					Dumbledore’s eyes, he seems to understand that Voldemort needs to
					be stopped and that Harry is the person destined to do it. Slughorn
					finally risks being cast in an unfavorable light to help Harry and
					Dumbledore. He makes a sacrifice for the greater good, no matter
					how much he wishes he didn’t have to reveal his true memory of that
					very unfortunate night. It is clear from Slughorn’s tone that although
					he is willing to tell Voldemort what a Horcrux is, he does not encourage
					any wizard to ever get involved with something so dark and terrible.

Once Harry has secured the memory, he and Voldemort are
					able to learn exactly what Voldemort knew about Horcruxes. By murdering
					seven people and tearing his soul into seven separate pieces, each
					of which has been magically contained within an object, Voldemort
					has become as close to immortal as any man or wizard can be. The
					only way to truly destroy Voldemort is to get rid of all seven Horcruxes,
					including the final Horcrux, which lies inside Voldemort’s regenerated
					body. Finally, Harry understands what Dumbledore has been doing
					when he leaves Hogwarts and feels a restored faith in his headmaster.
					Rather than leaving the school unguarded and ripe for attack, Dumbledore
					has been searching for the keys to Voldemort’s destruction. Harry
					cannot think of a more worthy use of his headmaster’s time and,
					consequently, is relieved to know that Dumbledore is not letting
					down his beloved Hogwarts. Dumbledore believes that the remaining
					four Horcruxes are all hidden in objects that are significant to
					Voldemort, and once again we are reminded of Voldemort’s penchant
					for stolen or important objects. This is clearly the climax of Harry’s
					private lessons with Dumbledore, and the final piece of information
					that Dumbledore feels he needs to bestow upon Harry to prepare him
					for his ultimate battle.

Even though Voldemort is an extraordinarily powerful wizard, gripped
					by a desire to kill Harry Potter as soon as possible, Dumbledore
					insists on making sure Harry understands that he is actually the
					stronger of the two wizards. Harry’s whole and untarnished soul is
					far more powerful than Voldemort’s dark, divided soul, and that is
					the power the prophecy refers to when it says that Harry has a “power
					the Dark Lord knows not.” Harry still finds this difficult to believe.
					Although he has heard Dumbledore speak of his ability to love time
					and time again, he still cannot fathom how something so simple and
					instinctual could ever help him destroy an evil as great as Voldemort’s.
					But Dumbledore knows that even if the prophecy did not exist, Harry
					would still feel compelled to destroy Voldemort, not only for all
					of the evil he has inflicted upon the Muggle and Wizarding worlds,
					but because he murdered both of Harry’s parents.

