The book’s main protagonist and also one of its antagonists. Carrie is a senior at Ewen High School with telekinetic powers and has lived in Chamberlain all her life. She has no friends and a plain appearance, and she is very shy as the result of being sequestered by her mother and enduring a lifetime of teasing from the few peers whom she does encounter.

Read an in-depth analysis of Carrietta White ("Carrie").

Carrie’s mother and one of the book’s main antagonists. She is a widow and Carrie is her only child. She is very fervent in her religious beliefs and practices, and limits her activities to work and prayer. She is estranged from her own mother and has no friends.

Read an in-depth analysis of Margaret White.

A senior at Ewen High School and part of the popular crowd. She develops a conscience regarding her treatment of others, especially Carrie, and struggles to accept and make reparations for her own actions.

Read an in-depth analysis of Sue Snell.

A senior at Ewen High School and part of the popular crowd. He is Sue’s boyfriend but takes Carrie to prom at Sue’s request.

Read an in-depth analysis of Tommy Ross.

A senior at Ewen High School and part of the popular crowd. She is one of the book’s main antagonists, and her prank on prom night is the catalyst for Carrie’s destructive actions that evening.

Read an in-depth analysis of Chris Hargensen.

Carrie’s gym teacher. It is her first year of teaching. She initially handles Carrie’s situation with the bullies poorly, and she knows this. This fact haunts her and influences her treatment of the other girls as well as her future treatment of Carrie.

Chris’ boyfriend. He does not attend Ewen High and has a bad reputation. He is different from the boys Chris is used to dating, and his dangerousness excites her. Although Billy treats Chris roughly, he does things for her even at risk to himself. He is the alpha-male among his friends, and they do what he tells them to do.

The assistant principal. He has a good working relationship with his colleagues and administers punishment evenly and fairly.

The school principal. He has a good grasp of the students at his school and where they fit in socially. He does not back down when he believes that he is right.

Chris Hargensen’s father and a prominent local attorney. He is used to getting what he wants and has passed that trait along to his daughter.

A senior at Ewen High School and part of the popular crowd. She is in Carrie’s gym class and on the decoration committee for prom. She is honest with her opinions but does not express them in a cruel way.

The girl in the white bathing suit. She lived next door to the Whites when she was a teenager and Carrie was a young child.

A senior at Ewen High School and a member of the prom committee.

A senior at Ewen High School and part of the popular crowd. She is in Carrie’s gym class.

A senior at Ewen High School and a member of the prom committee. Carrie teases her at prom, but not in a cruel way.

A senior at Ewen High School and good friends with Tommy.

A senior at Ewen High School. She attends prom with George.

One of Billy’s friends and part of the group at Henty’s farm.

One of Billy’s friends and part of the group at Henty’s farm.

Kenny’s brother and part of the group at Henty’s farm.

One of Billy’s friends and part of the group at Henty’s farm.

The senior class president.

The leader of the band at prom.

The town drunk.

The town sheriff.

A senior at Ewen High School.

Rhonda’s mother.

Helen’s mother.

