After receiving the phone call, Humbert races outside
					to discover Charlotte dead. She had tripped on the wet cement and
					fallen into the path of a car, which was swerving to avoid hitting
					a dog. Humbert quietly retrieves the letters she had been planning
					to mail and tears them up. The Farlows arrive, and Humbert begins
					drinking. That night, Humbert reads the letters, one of which is
					addressed to Lolita, one to a reformatory school where Charlotte
					planned to send Lolita, and one to Humbert himself. Later, Humbert
					implies to John and Jean Farlow that he and Charlotte had an affair
					many years ago, when he was still married to Valeria. Jean rushes
					to the conclusion that Humbert is Lolita’s real father. Humbert
					asks them not to tell Lolita of her mother’s death, so as not to
					ruin her time at camp. He tells them of his plans to take her away
					on a trip. 

The driver of the car that killed Charlotte, Mr. Frederick
					Beale, Jr., comes to apologize but states that Charlotte was at
					fault. Humbert agrees. In private, Humbert feels guilty over not
					having destroyed his journal, and weeps. The next day, as Humbert
					leaves to get Lolita, Jean, who has become very attracted to him,
					kisses him passionately. 

Humbert muses on the coincidences that have brought him
					to Lolita but doesn’t allow himself to become too excited by the
					thought of being with her. Trying to plan how to steal Lolita away
					without looking suspicious, Humbert becomes plagued by doubts. He
					plans to take her out of the camp by claiming that her mother has
					fallen sick, but he can’t be sure that Lolita hasn’t already heard
					about Charlotte’s death. Unfortunately, Lolita has gone on a hike
					and won’t return for two days. Humbert buys Lolita many presents, including
					clothing, as he knows her measurements almost by heart. He also
					makes a reservation at a hotel called the Enchanted Hunters, which
					Charlotte had mentioned to him before her death. 

Humbert, worn down by prison life, considers abandoning
					his account. He writes Lolita’s name out several times, and then
					commands the person who will eventually print his novel to keep
					repeating her name until the page is full.

When Humbert picks up Lolita from the camp, he thinks
					for a moment that he might want to simply be a good father to her.
					That moment passes, however, and he realizes he still loves her.
					Humbert tells Lolita that her mother is in the hospital, and they
					drive off. Lolita tells Humbert that she’s been unfaithful to him,
					but then she kisses him flirtatiously. In the midst of their kiss,
					a policeman stops them and asks after the whereabouts of a blue
					sedan, which Humbert and Lolita profess not to have seen. They arrive
					at the Enchanted Hunters and take room 342. Unable to get a cot
					for Lolita, Humbert realizes they will have to share a double bed.
					Lolita giggles and says that would be incest. In the room, Lolita
					shows Humbert how to kiss, but she soon loses interest in what they’re doing.
					Downstairs, in the dining room, Lolita spots someone who looks like
					Quilty, the celebrity she admires. Back in the room, Humbert gives
					Lolita a sleeping pill, and she soon becomes drowsy. As she falls
					asleep, she tells Humbert that she has been a disgusting girl, but
					Humbert tells her to tell him tomorrow. Humbert locks the door and
					goes downstairs.

As Humbert settles into the role of the grieving widower,
					Charlotte’s death touches him with an apparently genuine remorse,
					but he still cannot bring himself to deny his desire for Lolita.
					The friction generated by Humbert’s intense appetites and his refusal
					to be bound by conventional morality will continue throughout the
					novel. Ever the sophisticated European, Humbert scoffs at Charlotte’s
					bourgeois morality and her vulgar pretensions to class, yet he too
					believes in presenting a façade of respectability that ultimately
					is not matched by an internal sense of decency. Whenever Humbert
					feels guilt or attempts to be fatherly, he lingers for a moment
					before brushing the feeling aside. Humbert continually mocks the
					adult women who are attracted to him, and their naively romantic
					notions. However, Humbert’s own desires are equally intense and
					equally starry-eyed, and those passions control Humbert as much,
					if not more, as the women’s passions control them. Despite the eloquence
					with which he argues his case, Humbert is guilty of precisely the
					same faults as the women he scorns.

The hand of McFate, which we have already seen working
					in previous sections of the novel, provides numerous coincidences
					in these chapters as well. For example, Lolita and Humbert stay
					in Room 342 at the Enchanted Hunters, the same number as the Hazes’
					street address. At the hotel, Lolita spots a man who resembles Clare Quilty,
					the playwright whose picture she once had on her bedroom wall. In
					the car, Humbert and Lolita share a kiss that gets interrupted by
					a policeman looking for a blue sedan. He doesn’t comment on the
					kiss, even though Lolita states that Humbert should have been arrested—for
					speeding. This foreshadows the final section of the novel in which
					Humbert, after killing Quilty, is indeed arrested for speeding.
					The policeman’s lack of interest in the kiss implies a certain societal
					tolerance of the relationship between Humbert and Lolita, a situation
					that Humbert is more than willing to exploit. 

A final instance of McFate at work can be seen in the
					name of the hotel, the Enchanted Hunters. Later in the novel, Lolita
					will star in a play of the same name, written by none other than
					Clare Quilty. The phrase itself represents many things, but it most
					clearly refers to Humbert himself. He frequently claims that he
					been spellbound by nymphets who possess magical powers and mythical
					qualities. Humbert is enchanted by Lolita, the object of his obsession,
					both in the charming, familiar sense of the word and the more distressing, literal
					sense of being bewitched or spellbound. Later in the novel, Humbert
					will also become a hunter—first of Lolita, then of Quilty. Humbert
					notices these strange coincidences in prison, as he writes the manuscript
					and ruminates on events from his past. Similarly, we won’t discover
					the full import of these clues until the novel has ended, and we
					can look backward to construct a pattern of incidents. 

