As the lights come up, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are
					now inside, watching as Ophelia rushes past, followed by Hamlet. Silently,
					Hamlet grabs Ophelia but quickly releases her and runs offstage.
					Ophelia runs off as well. Then Claudius and Gertrude enter. Speaking
					Shakespearean English, Claudius confuses Rosencrantz with Guildenstern,
					then explains that he wants their help in determining what is wrong
					with Hamlet, their childhood friend. Speaking lines taken directly
					from the play Hamlet, Claudius says that Hamlet
					has recently changed, perhaps as a result of his father’s death.
					Gertrude echoes Claudius’s comments. Also in Shakespearean English,
					Rosencrantz and Guildenstern promise to do whatever they can to
					figure out what is bothering Hamlet. Polonius enters to say that
					he wishes he knew why Hamlet has changed so drastically. Everybody
					but Rosencrantz and Guildenstern leaves.

Rosencrantz and Guildenstern try to figure out what has
					just happened. Guildenstern comforts Rosencrantz by telling him
					that they will soon understand why they are there and what they
					need to do to return home. Guildenstern reminds him of the logic
					at work in the universe and says that the two just have to stick
					it out until the events have ended. They start discussing possible
					causes of Hamlet’s madness, essentially repeating the speeches made
					earlier by Claudius and Gertrude. Together, they decide to probe
					Hamlet using questions and answers. They practice, borrowing the
					scoring used in tennis, but succeed only in further confusing each
					other. Whether they are seriously interested in the answers to each
					other’s questions, or whether they want to beat the other one at
					the game, is not clear.

Hamlet enters without speaking, then leaves. Immediately,
					Guildenstern decides that Hamlet has changed greatly. Guildenstern suggests
					that Rosencrantz pretend to be Guildenstern, while Guildenstern
					pretends to be Hamlet so that they can practice the question-and-answer
					game. After a while, Rosencrantz begins asking Guildenstern questions
					about what has recently transpired at Elsinore, the court of Denmark.
					They conclude confused, because Hamlet seems to have lots of reasons
					to be upset: his father has recently died under murky circumstances,
					and his uncle has usurped the throne to become king and married
					his mother, Gertrude.

Hamlet comes back in, confusing his companion Polonius
					with riddles. He excitedly greets Rosencrantz and Guildenstern but
					mistakes one for the other as the stage goes dark.

Whereas Shakespeare’s Hamlet is a tragedy
					with occasional moments of comedy, Stoppard’s play is a comedy with
					occasional moments of tragedy. But both plays attempt to portray
					the complexities of life. According to the plots of both plays,
					Claudius has summoned Rosencrantz and Guildenstern to help with
					Hamlet. But, as Rosencrantz and Guildenstern lucidly realize, Hamlet
					has many reasons to be upset: he has just lost his father, the crown
					(Claudius has become king of Denmark, even though Hamlet is of age
					and capable of governing), and his mother (she remarried very quickly after
					the death of Hamlet’s father). The interweaving of happy and sad
					things occurs in the riddles Hamlet speaks to Polonius: these might
					be a tragic result of his madness, they might simply be his childish
					attempt to make his friends laugh by making fun of an old man, or
					they might be a little of both. Similarly, the verbal sparring between
					Rosencrantz and Guildenstern resembles a comedy routine, with non
					sequitur following non sequitur, even as they try to figure out
					whether their friend, tragically, has gone insane. They even highlight
					the nonsensical nature of their dialogue by keeping score as if
					the questions and answers were a game of tennis. Nobody, including
					the men themselves, seems able to tell Rosencrantz from Guildenstern,
					which is funny but also sad, as it comments on the difficulties
					of establishing a firm identity in a chaotic world. Like life, the
					two plays have moments of joy and sadness, and neither is wholly
					funny nor entirely tragic.

Stoppard takes lines directly from Hamlet as
					a way of emphasizing the relationship between his play and Shakespeare’s
					play. On the one hand, without Hamlet,
Rosencrantz
						and Guildenstern Are Dead would not exist. Stoppard borrows
					heavily from Shakespeare’s text, including the characters of Rosencrantz
					and Guildenstern, and he incorporates lines verbatim from Shakespeare
					into his own work. Whenever Rosencrantz and Guildenstern speak to
					a character from Hamlet, they switch from modern
					English to Shakespearean English. Although they do not notice the
					difference, we as readers are meant to pick up on the change in
					language. On the other hand, Stoppard’s versions of Rosencrantz
					and Guildenstern are very different from the two men found in Hamlet.
					Whereas Shakespeare’s portrays the two men as goons with little
					personality, Stoppard gives the men individual characteristics and
					far more lines than in the original play. They think, feel, joke,
					gamble, and reason. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern clearly want to
					help Hamlet, and they attempt to ascertain whether Hamlet has, in
					fact, gone insane through the game of question-and-answer. In this
					sense, Stoppard’s Rosencrantz and Guildenstern do not simply act
					as agents of Claudius, as Shakespeare’s versions do. Instead, Stoppard
					lets Rosencrantz and Guildenstern try to function independently
					from both Claudius, their king, and Shakespeare, their original
					creator. Stoppard wants to emphasize Hamlet as
					not solely the greatest work of drama in the English language but
					as a play capable of speaking to us on a human, visceral level.

