Episode Ten consists of nineteen short views of characters,
					major and minor, as they make their way around Dublin in the afternoon. Within
					each subsection, short, disjunctive paragraphs pop up that depict
					a simultaneous action in some other part of the city. These are not
					rendered below.

	Father John Conmee travels from his Dublin presbytery
					to a suburban school to try to get Patrick Dignam’s son admitted
					for free. Conmee walks to the tram station, passing a one-legged
					sailor, three schoolboys, and others on the way. Conmee gets on
					an outbound tram, notices a poster of Eugene Stratton, a blackface
					minstrel, and thinks about missionary work. Conmee gets off at Howth
					road, takes out his breviary (book of prayers), and reads to himself
					as he walks. In front of him, a young couple guiltily emerges from
					the hedgerow. Conmee blesses them.

	Corny Kelleher examines a coffinlid, then gossips with
					a policeman. 

	The one-legged sailor crutches up Eccles street, singing
					a patriotic English song and asking for alms. He passes Katey and
					Boody Dedalus. A woman’s arm (Molly’s) throws a coin out of a window for
					the sailor. 

	Katey and Boody Dedalus enter their kitchen, where their
					sister Maggy is washing clothes. The Dedalus sisters discuss the
					household’s lack of money and food—Sister Mary Patrick has donated some
					pea soup to them. Maggy explains that Dilly has gone to see their
					father, Simon Dedalus. 

	The throwaway that Bloom threw into the river in Episode
					Eight floats down river.

	A shopgirl arranges a basket of food for Blazes Boylan.
					Boylan writes the delivery address and looks down the girl’s shirt.
					He takes a red flower for his lapel and asks to use her telephone.

	Stephen meets his voice teacher, Almidano Artifoni, in
					the street outside Trinity College. Artifoni tries to persuade Stephen
					to pursue a music career in Dublin. Stephen is flattered. Artifoni
					runs to catch a tram.

	Miss Dunne, Blazes Boylan’s secretary, puts away the
					novel she is reading. She daydreams about going out tonight. Boylan
					calls. Miss Dunne tells Boylan that Lenehan will be at the Ormond
					Hotel at four o’clock.

	Ned Lambert meets with J.J. O’Molloy and the reverend
					Hugh C. Love to show the reverend around Saint Mary’s Abbey (now Lambert’s
					warehouse). Lambert discusses the history of the abbey with Love,
					who is writing a history book. Lambert and O’Molloy discuss O’Molloy’s
					money troubles.

	Tom Rochford shows his invention, a mechanism to keep
					track of betting races, to Nosey Flynn, McCoy, and Lenehan. Lenehan promises
					to speak to Boylan this afternoon about Rochford’s in-vention. McCoy
					and Lenehan leave together. Lenehan ducks into a betting office
					to check on the price for Sceptre, his pick for the Gold Cup race.
					Lenehan re-emerges and reports to McCoy that Bantam Lyons is inside
					betting on a long-shot horse (the horse Lyons thinks Bloom tipped
					him to in Episode Five). The men spot Bloom looking through a book
					merchant’s cart nearby. Lenehan claims to have groped a willing
					Molly. McCoy sticks up for Bloom, who he thinks has an artistic
					side. 

	Bloom looks through the books at a bookseller’s cart
					and settles on Sweets of Sin for Molly.

	At Dillon’s auction rooms, the lacquey rings the bell.
					Dilly Dedalus waits outside for her father. Simon emerges and Dilly
					asks him for money. He hands over a shilling he borrowed from Jack
					Power. Dilly suspects he has more money, but Simon walks away from
					her.

	The viceregal cavalcade has begun its cross-town journey.

	Tom Kernan passes the spot where the patriot Robert Emmet was
					hanged, and thinks of Ben Dollard singing “The Croppy Boy.” Kernan
					spots the viceregal cavalcade, but waves too late.

	Stephen looks at jewels in a shop window, then browses
					a bookseller’s cart. His sister Dilly approaches him and asks Stephen
					if a French primer that she just bought is good. Stephen considers
					Dilly, who has his eyes and his quick mind but who is caught in
					the desperate situation at their family home. Stephen is caught
					between an impulse to save Dilly and the others and an impulse to
					escape from them completely. 

	Bob Cowley greets Simon Dedalus and they discuss Cowley’s debt
					to Reuben J. Dodd, the moneylender. Ben Dollard arrives with advice
					about Cowley’s debt.  

	Martin Cunningham, along with Jack Power and John Wyse Nolan,
					conducts a collection for the Dignam children. Nolan ironically
					notes Bloom’s generous five-shilling donation. Cunningham, Power,
					and Nolan meet up with John Henry, the assistant town clerk, and
					John Fanning, the subsheriff. The viceregal cavalcade passes them.

	Buck Mulligan and Haines sit in a coffeeshop, where Parnell’s brother
					is playing chess in the corner. Haines and Mulligan discuss Stephen—Haines
					thinks Stephen is mentally off-balance. Mulligan agrees that Stephen
					will never turn out to be a true poet, because he has been damaged
					by Catholic visions of hell.

	Tisdall Farrell walks behind Almidano Artifoni in a zigzag
					and collides with the blind man that Bloom helped at the end of
					Episode Eight. 

	Dignam’s son, Patrick junior, walks homeward carrying
					porksteaks. He passes other schoolboys and wonders if they know
					of his father’s death. He thinks of his father’s coffin being carried
					out and the last time he saw his father, who was drunk and going
					out to the pub.

	The progress of the viceregal cavalcade (containing William Humble,
					Earl of Dudley and Lady Dudley, among others) is tracked, from the
					viceregal lodge in Phoenix park to the Mirus bazaar. It passes many
					of the people we have seen so far in the chapter. Most of them notice,
					and some salute the cavalcade. 

Episode Ten, “The Wandering Rocks,” serves as an interlude between
					the first and last nine episodes. The technique of the episode is
					somewhat filmic. The episode as a whole renders the sense of a wide
					view of the entire city of Dublin, with figures moving throughout,
					while the nineteen subsections, and the cut-aways within them, function
					as quickly changing close-ups. Accordingly, much of the episode
					is focused on exteriors—appearances and movements. Few characters
					are granted more than a line or two of interior monologue. The “Wandering
					Rocks” of The Odyssey were apparently boulders
					that shifted position in the mist and could capsize a ship (Odysseus
					never actually sailed through them). Joyce’s “Wandering Rocks” in
					Episode Ten are represented by textual traps for the reader. The
					most common type of trap is the one- or two-line interpolations
					that suddenly describe action happening elsewhere. These textual
					traps make the narrator seem particularly masterful or obtuse. 

	The episode is framed on each end by an extended progression—Father
					Conmee’s trip to a suburban school at the beginning, and the viceregal
					cavalcade’s progress from Phoenix Park to the Mirus bazaar at the
					end. Both are on altruistic errands—Conmee is trying to get Dignam’s
					son into Jesuit school for free, and the Earl of Dudley is presiding
					over the Mirus charity bazaar to benefit Mercer’s Hospital. Individually,
					they represent the power of religious and -governmental institutions. 

	We get a closer view of Stephen’s family in this episode.
					Stephen is not currently sleeping at home, where his sisters, Maggy,
					Katey, Boody, and Dilly, struggle to provide subsistence for themselves
					and the rest of the family since their mother has died. Stephen’s
					run-in with Dilly at the bookseller’s stall shows Stephen experiencing remorse
					about his family, especially because Dilly shows a spark of intellect
					similar to his own. Yet he has just received a paycheck today, and
					it has been and will be spent on drink, like his father’s money.
					Stephen refuses to succumb to his conscience and be dragged back
					into the despair of his family’s poverty and misery.													

Bloom and Stephen, though they do not meet, are further
					aligned in this episode. We see both men browsing a bookseller’s
					cart (both, interestingly, look at books about sex). Both men do
					not see the viceregal cavalcade at the end, though most of the other
					characters do. We see other characters gossiping about Stephen and
					Bloom, specifically referencing their artistic sensibilities. McCoy
					tells Lenehan that Bloom has a refined, artistic side, while Buck
					tells Haines that, though he will never be a poet, Stephen will
					write something in ten years. This schematic alignment of Stephen
					and Bloom prepares us for their climactic meeting to come and prepares
					us to see their “relationship” as potentially something other than
					father-son.

