In the late winter of 2004, Didion
					agrees to cover the following summer’s Democratic and Republican
					conventions for the New York Review of Books, believing
					it will help get her back to a normal life. Soon after Quintana
					is discharged from Rusk, Didion attends the Democratic Convention
					in Boston. Since she has few family memories associated with the
					city, she believes she’ll be able to avoid falling prey to the vortex
					effect. However, while in the Fleet Center, Didion remembers that
					Quintana’s wedding had taken place exactly one year earlier and
					falls to tears. Seized with panic, she leaves the center and watches
					the rest of the convention from her hotel room. While waiting for
					her flight the next morning, she wonders how she can ever return
					the places she associates strongly with John, when even Boston seems
					too difficult.

Before her trip, she had clipped a New York Times article
					about physicist Stephen Hawking. Hawking had disavowed an earlier
					theory of his, in which he claimed that matter that entered a black
					hole could never be retrieved. The article had explained how this
					about-face held major consequences for science, since it implies
					that time can be reversed and therefore that outcomes can be changed.
					The story had struck Didion, but she doesn’t understand why until
					she attends the Republican Convention at Madison Square Garden in New
					York, a month later. Didion experiences the vortex effect when she
					remembers two previous moments in the Garden. In the first instance,
					she and John went to a Lakers-Knicks basketball game, an unusual
					event for the couple that prompted John to note that they “were
					not having any fun” in their lives, and to argue that they needed
					to do new, unexpected things. She also remembers how she covered
					the Democratic Convention in Madison Square Garden once before,
					in 1992, and how John would wait for her
					to eat dinner every night, even though she never got home until 11
p.m. After
					a few minutes of reminiscing, she realizes that she doesn’t believe
					she can change the outcome of those earlier events, but that since
					John’s death, she has been constantly trying to reverse time.

John would occasionally criticize the routine nature of
					their marriage. Didion knows his comments had something to do with
					Joe and Gertrude Black, a couple they had met while doing a lecture tour
					of Indonesia in 1980. Joe had left a position
					at the Rockefeller Foundation to teach political science at a university
					in Jogjakarta. The couple made a big impression on John, who saw
					them as a model for the kind of life he wanted he and Didion to
					live someday. John mentioned the Blacks a few times just before
					he died, so Didion searches his computer for their names. She finds
					them in a file John used to keep notes for an upcoming book. Next
					to their names John had typed “the concept of service.” Didion wonders
					if, by failing to be more like the Blacks, she and John had wasted
					their time. She sees that he last modified the file on the afternoon
					of his death, when they were working in their respective offices.
					Didion feels that, instead of working in separate rooms, they should
					have been together, like the Blacks.

As Didion narrates her mourning process, she describes
					both progress and backsliding. She finds that when she can lock
					onto a routine she has the emotional and mental space to analyze
					her thoughts and slowly recover, but when introduced into unfamiliar circumstances
					she finds herself overwhelmed by the vortex effect. Routines engage
					her and give her a level of familiarity and comfort, but when introduced
					to new stimuli, such as the conventions, she finds herself caught
					up in whatever memories and associations she has with her new surroundings.
					Even though she has few personal associations with the city of Boston
					or Madison Square Garden, she finds that memories of John and Quintana
					are persistent and are perhaps triggered simply by the newness of
					her surroundings. While in the previous chapters she had made progress
					in understanding her mourning process, her attempts to reintegrate
					herself into the world and her work end up having the opposite effect,
					taking her out of her active process of mourning and making her
					subject to a passive experience of grief.

Didion realizes that, even when she was unhappy during
					John’s life, she never made an attempt to change her circumstances
					through either action or magical thinking, but that since he died
					she has wished to change everything. Didion makes a distinction
					between the surface changes people crave when they want to break
					out of a routine with an authentic desire for change that emerges
					when situations are truly untenable. John had wanted to break out
					familiar patterns, but only as a way to enliven and engage their
					relationship. After John died, Didion realized that any changes
					John proposed—such as going to basketball game—were minor, but that
					her desire to change every moment that had occurred since his death
					was indicative of a need for true change. In retrospect, she thinks
					that the changes John desired remained cursory because they had
					such a high level of satisfaction in their lives. To some extent,
					this may be an instance of Didion idealizing her relationship with
					John, but she takes pains to distinguish the previous times in her
					life when she expressed a need for change from her current situation,
					in which she desperately, truly wishes for things to be different.

John’s powerful reaction to meeting Joe and Gertrude Black
					in Indonesia represents a rare moment of disconnect between him
					and Didion. Didion has spent much of the book describing how rare
					and wonderful her marriage was, and everything suggests that John
					felt the same way. At the same time, the Blacks represented something that
					John felt was missing from their marriage. In his typed notes, John
					related the Blacks to “the concept of service,” and Didion connects
					this idea to a crossword clue in the morning paper, which read, “Fritter
					away.” Didion never explicitly states what kind of “service” she
					imagines John wanted them to undertake, or how exactly they wasted
					their time. Perhaps it was a feeling of spontaneity they lacked,
					the kind of impulsive abandon that might prompt a couple to leave
					their comfortable American life and move to Asia. Though in later
					chapters Didion discusses her and John’s tendency to “improvise,”
					it’s clear that, disregarding trips and vacations, she and John
					stayed close to the places that were comfortable and familiar: New
					York, Los Angeles, Hawaii. Perhaps John looked back at a life of
					relative wealth and privilege and wished that he had done more with
					those gifts. And yet, even though the implication that she and John
					had wasted their marriage stings Didion, she seems even more disturbed
					by the fact that she now has so many unanswered questions and will
					never be able to learn what John really meant in his cryptic notes.
					In the end, the only conclusion she can come to is that they should
					have been together when he typed those words. Closeness and intimacy,
					not service, were the great products of this relationship, and once
					again Didion is reminded how intense her loss has been. Her reaction,
					though incredibly poignant, is also somewhat ironic, since she finds
					herself wishing that she had spent more time with
					John, even though her devastation springs largely from the fact
					that the two were rarely, if ever, apart.

