The Karenins continue to live in the same house but are
					almost completely estranged from each other. Karenin makes it a
					rule to see Anna every day—in order to avoid spreading rumors of
					separation among the servants—but he never dines at home. Both husband
					and wife fervently hope that their painful situation is temporary.

Vronsky endures a dull week, entertaining a visiting foreign
					dignitary who wishes to experience the true spirit of Russia. Carousing with
					gypsy girls, the foreigner believes he is discovering Russian culture.
					Vronsky is pained by the resemblance between the foreigner and himself:
					both are healthy, confident, rather empty noblemen.

Returning home one night, Vronsky finds a note from Anna
					saying that she must see him, inviting him to her home when Karenin
					is to be at a meeting. Vronsky goes to Anna at the appointed time
					but is shocked to run into Karenin, whose meeting has ended early. Anna
					is grouchy, making barbed remarks about Vronsky’s night with the
					foreigner and the gypsy girls. Vronsky is sadly aware of how Anna
					has changed, both morally and physically: she is irritable and has
					put on weight.

Anna erupts in anger toward Karenin, calling him a puppet
					and an “administrative machine” and reproaching his lack of guts.
					She says that in his place she would have killed a wife like herself.
					Vronsky attributes Anna’s moodiness to her pregnancy, and asks when the
					baby is due. Anna says that it should not be long. She adds that soon
					everything will be resolved, as she will die shortly. Vronsky accuses
					Anna of speaking nonsense, but she declares that she has had a prophetic
					dream—a vision of an old peasant man rummaging in a sack and talking
					about the necessity of beating iron. The peasant in the dream told
					her that she would die in childbirth.

Karenin passes a sleepless night after his run-in with
					Vronsky,	angered that Anna has violated the only condition he placed
					on her—that she never receive Vronsky in Karenin’s house. Karenin tells
					Anna he plans to initiate divorce proceedings, and seizes her love
					letters from Vronsky to use as evidence. Anna begs Karenin to allow
					her to keep custody of Seryozha. Karenin replies that although he
					no longer loves the boy, he will take him anyway.

The next day, Karenin visits a divorce lawyer, who assumes
					Karenin wishes to pursue a mutually consenting divorce. Karenin explains
					that he wants to prove involuntary exposure of an adulterous affair,
					using the love letters as evidence. The lawyer warns him that such
					cases require the involvement of religious authorities, and that
					often letters are not sufficient evidence. The lawyer asks Karenin
					for freedom to proceed with the specifics of the divorce as he thinks
					best, and Karenin agrees.

After being thwarted by a rival at work, Karenin decides
					to set out for the provinces in an attempt to redeem his professional
					reputation. He encounters Stiva and Dolly one day and treats them coolly.
					Stiva, who is in good spirits and is enjoying his new ballerina mistress,
					invites Karenin, Levin, Kitty, and others to a dinner party. Karenin
					initially declines, revealing his plans to divorce Anna. Though
					Stiva is shocked and worried about his sister, he insists that Karenin
					come nonetheless. At the dinner party, Karenin is cold toward the
					others. Even so, the food is excellent and the party is successful.
					Kitty and Levin see each other for the first time since the failed
					marriage proposal, and their mutual love is overwhelmingly evident.
					Over dinner, the guests discuss education and the rights of women.

Anna’s bizarre dream and her prophecy that her life will
					soon end deepen her association with death. Prior to this point
					in the novel, Anna has been linked to death only symbolically, through
					the death of the workman at the train station and through the black
					dress she wears when dancing with Vronsky. When Anna straightforwardly announces
					that she is convinced she will die in childbirth, the connection
					between her illicit love and her death is cemented. Her sense that
					death is approaching is not rational, as it is based solely on a dream—but
					Anna has never done anything for rational reasons, so her certainty
					about dying carries a great deal of weight. In one sense this dream
					is a simple device foreshadowing Anna’s eventual death, accompanied
					by a note of the supernatural that suggests a divine force that
					punishes wrongdoers. But her death may be more than a tragic side
					effect of her love. Tolstoy hints that Anna may actually yearn for
					her own demise. When Anna rejects Karenin’s restraint, saying that
					in his place she would have killed a wife like herself, her suicide
					fantasy is obvious. Death may come not as a punishment but as the
					only option for a desperate woman.

The specter of dishonesty pervades the Karenins’ domestic
					life, as they still live together in purported harmony despite the
					reality of their near-complete estrangement. Karenin is so intent
					on maintaining the outward appearance of propriety that he makes
					a point of visiting Anna once a day merely so rumors will not spread
					among the servants. Anna’s worst nightmare—prolonging her deceitful existence—is
					unfortunately now her way of life. She knows that this charade may
					continue indefinitely if Karenin refuses a divorce.

Tolstoy artfully broadens Anna Karenina into
					a social critique by showing how the Karenins’ false lifestyle is
					not an anomaly but actually quite typical of other aristocratic
					Russians in the same social circle. Subtly, and without commentary
					or value judgment, the narrator mentions Stiva’s new ballerina mistress,
					showing us that Stiva has not repented of his earlier offense to
					Dolly but has perhaps only learned to hide his misdemeanors more
					carefully. Similarly, Vronsky is aware that he is only mimicking
					typical Russian life with his foreign guest, playing at being the
					stereotypical high-living nobleman his guest expects to see. This
					universality of deceitful living among the Russian nobility makes
					their upcoming rejection of Anna all the more hypocritical.

Stiva’s society dinner party seems a bit jarring, as it
					shows us that the carefree Stiva pursues his social calendar as
					usual even after receiving the shocking news that divorce proceedings
					are in the works against his sister. Though divorce may be commonplace
					in our society, in 1870s Russia it carried
					a great stigma, typically leaving the guilty party socially shunned,
					unable to remarry, and without custody of his or her children. In
					this light, we might expect a more sensitive brother to cancel his
					dinner party upon hearing such devastating news. Stiva, however,
					carries on with his soiree as scheduled. We cannot wholeheartedly
					blame Stiva, though, as he clearly loves his sister. Furthermore,
					we sense that he may be hoping to use the party to dissuade Karenin
					from divorce, though a private and solemn meeting at home would
					likely be more fitting than a festive dinner. Still, we have lingering
					doubts about the way Stiva and the other male characters in Anna
						Karenina treat women. As a novelist, Tolstoy was enormously
					sensitive to the situation of women in Russia. Here he implicitly
					criticizes the womanizing and oblivious Stiva: Anna may be ruined,
					but Stiva lets the party go on.

