Alina Starkov 

The heroine and protagonist of the novel. Alina is bound to the Darkling through Morozova’s collar, which he places on her neck in the first book of the trilogy, Shadow and Bone. With her power now amplified through Rusalye’s fetter, Alina transitions from a poor orphan girl to a spiritual and military leader. She hungers for the greater power that a third amplifier promises even as she is haunted by the Darkling’s spirit. She struggles with the romantic feelings she has for Mal and Nikolai as well as with the guilt she endures for her part in the Darkling’s revolt, the creation of the Fold, and Novokribirsk’s destruction. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Alina Starkov

Malyen “Mal” Oretsev 

Alina’s love interest and captain of her personal guard. Through their shared past in Keramzin as orphans, Mal and Alina keep one another focused, but their priorities diverge when Nikolai returns them to Ravka. There, Mal grows increasingly frustrated with Alina’s distance and the secrets she keeps from him as her responsibilities grow. He indulges in brawling, cards, and whiskey, and his hot temper frequently gets the better of him.  

Read an in-depth analysis of Mal Oretsev

Nikolai “Sturmhond” Lantsov 

Prince turned privateer returning to save Ravka. Nikolai changes identities and allegiances rapidly, so his true motives remain suspect. He serves as a foil to Mal, who is loyal and steadfast. However, his mutability proves he has the experience necessary to lead a large and diverse nation because he can relate to the people he meets on their terms. Although his marriage proposal to Alina is a sham intended to endear his family and the Ravkan people to him, he respects her opinion and tries to earn her admiration.  

Read an in-depth analysis of Nikolai Lantsov

The Darkling 

The novel’s antagonist and foil to Alina, Nikolai, and Mal. Although he is clearly evil, Alina is attracted to him at the cost of her relationship with Mal. They share a supernatural bond of power through Morozova’s collar. The Darkling commands an army of Grisha defectors as well as shadowy creatures, the volcra and the nichevo’ya. The Darkling is mad with power, although its use drains his energy. He wants command of both the small sciences and the deeper magic called merzost, and he does not care what this power costs.  

Read an in-depth analysis of the Darkling

Tolya Yul-Baatar 

A giant Shu with golden eyes and Tamar’s twin brother. He is a Grisha Heartrender who learned to fight and escaped from a people that distrust and torture Grisha. Tolya makes his living as a mercenary, but he feels a spiritual calling to serve the Sun Summoner, as evidenced by his tattoos and devotion to Alina.  

Tamar Kir-Baatar 

Tolya’s twin sister and a powerful Shu warrior. Tolya’s specialty is wielding the twin axes that she keeps strapped to her thighs. Like Tolya, she seeks the Sun Summoner and swears loyalty to Alina. 

The Apparat 

Spiritual leader of Ravka and the Darkling’s former right-hand man. Previously in the trilogy, the Apparat helped the Darkling betray King Alexander. The Apparat is now on the run and preaching salvation through Sankta Alina, the Sun Summoner, to a ragtag group of radical pilgrims. He asks her for a partnership and ultimately offers her refuge beneath Ravka.  

Ilya Morozova 

A renowned Grisha Fabrikator and the figure behind powerful amplifiers. Variously described as Sankta Ilya or Ilya Morozova, little remains of his extensive writing except for the Istorii Sankt’ya. He was martyred and is depicted with fetters around his neck and wrists, bound by chains, and surrounded by a stag, a sea dragon, and a firebird beneath an arch in a river valley.  

Vasily Lantsov 

Prince of Ravka and first in line to inherit the throne. Vasily is spoiled and petulant, preferring horse racing, playing cards, drinking, and hunting to fulfilling his royal responsibilities. His attempts to broker peace with Fjerda makes Ravka vulnerable to the Darkling and his forces. 

Baghra 

The Darkling’s mother. In Shadow and Bone, Baghra taught Alina to come to terms with her Grisha powers and later helped Alina escape Ravka. As punishment, the Darkling tortured her, replacing her eyes with deep, swirling shadows. She refuses Alina’s entreaties to help her find the firebird.  

Genya 

The Grisha Tailor and Alina’s former friend. Genya serves the Darkling, overseeing Alina in captivity aboard Sturmhond’s boat. Genya chooses to stay with the Darkling and becomes the object of his wrath after Alina’s escape. Genya is returned to Alina’s side, ruined, in the battle in the chapel. 

David 

A Materialki and Genya’s love interest. The Darkling had chosen David to forge and fasten Morozova’s collar around Alina’s neck in the previous book of the trilogy. He feels guilty now and misses Genya. He reacts by throwing himself into his work, creating mirrors that he hopes will magnify Alina’s power against the Darkling. 

Fedyor 

One of the Etherealki. Fedyor meets Alina on the road to broker peace for the Grisha. He becomes an instrumental member of the war council, despite taking offense at her orders to dismantle the Grisha hierarchy. 

Sergei 

A Heartrender. Sergei is the first Grisha to challenge Alina’s leadership of the Second Army. He cares deeply for Marie and is heartbroken when the nichevo’ya kill her.  

Zoya 

One of the Etherealki, a Squaller. Zoya is a striking beauty and Alina’s rival for Mal’s affections. Once Alina’s rival for as the Darkling’s “favorite,” Zoya surprisingly supports Alina as commander of the Second Army. Though Zoya’s relationship with Alina remains rocky, she stays true to the cause.  

Marie 

One of the Etherealki. Marie stands with Sergei against Alina.  

Nadia 

One of the Etherealki. Quiet but determined, Nadia introduces her brother to Alina and asks that he be allowed to stay despite his young age. 

Adrik 

A Grisha and Nadia’s brother. Adrik is young enough to still be in school, which Alina intends to evacuate before the battle. Nadia pleads for him to remain, and, although shaken, he survives the battle. 

