Scarlett and Rhett enjoy a lavish New Orleans honeymoon.
					On their last night, however, Scarlett has a nightmare: she is running
					through the mist near Tara, searching for something she cannot name.
					Rhett comforts her, telling her she will get used to being safe.
					He adds that she can have as much money as she likes for anything
					she wants but that he will not spend a cent on her businesses because
					he does not care to support Ashley Wilkes.

Still angry with Scarlett for causing the Klan raid that
					endangered so many men, the women of Atlanta intend to cut Scarlett
					and Rhett out of society. Melanie passionately defends Scarlett
					and prevents the community from shunning her completely. Scarlett
					supervises the construction of the most lavish mansion in Atlanta
					and befriends many wealthy and corrupt Republicans, Scalawags, and carpetbaggers.
					She loves being rich, and cares little that the society dedicated
					to the Old South refuses to attend her parties. Rhett pays the bills,
					though he regards Scarlett’s new social circle with undisguised
					contempt. He warns her that she will regret severing ties with Old
					Atlanta when the Democrats are back in power, but Scarlett dismisses
					this possibility.

Scarlett generally enjoys her life with Rhett, though
					he often mocks her and treats her with indifference. One afternoon,
					Scarlett discovers, to her horror, that she is pregnant. She wants
					to terminate the pregnancy, but Rhett angrily says that he once
					saw a woman die while aborting her baby and refuses to allow Scarlett
					to risk her life. Scarlett gives birth to a daughter, and Rhett
					stuns everyone with his unabashed love for his daughter. They name
					her Eugenie Victoria, but when Melanie observes that the baby’s
					eyes are blue like the bonnie blue flag (a Confederate flag), the
					baby’s nickname becomes Bonnie Blue Butler.

Scarlett goes to the mill to go over the books with Ashley.
					Ashley indicates that he is jealous of Rhett. Thrilled that Ashley
					still loves her, Scarlett decides to tell Rhett that she wants separate
					bedrooms, which implies that she wants to end their sexual relationship.
					Rhett tells her with indifference that he will look elsewhere for
					female companionship. After he leaves, Scarlett cries while thinking
					of everything she will miss about sharing a bed with Rhett, like
					waking in his arms after a nightmare and long conversations before
					sleep.

Rhett decides that Bonnie must not suffer in Atlanta simply
					because he and Scarlett have fallen from society’s grace. He begins
					an elaborate campaign to regain the good favor of the old Southern
					matrons. He also breaks ties with the Republican Party and works
					to put the Democrats in power. Gradually, Old Atlanta comes around
					and embraces Rhett and Bonnie, though it still scorns Scarlett and
					her Republican socializing. When she is two years old, Bonnie develops a
					pronounced fear of the dark. Rhett allows Bonnie to sleep in his room
					with a lit lamp every night.

Scarlett’s pregnancy brings children to the forefront
					of the novel for the first time. Beginning with Wade’s birth in
					Chapter VII, Scarlett has been a mother for nearly the entire novel.
					Until now, however, her children do not play an important role in
					either Scarlett’s life or the plot: Wade is not mentioned for long
					sections of the novel, though he becomes slightly more prominent
					in Part Five, and Ella receives only passing mention after her birth.
					Bonnie, however, appears more often in the novel because of Rhett’s
					love for her. Scarlett has never really loved anyone besides her
					parents—her passion for Ashley is more childhood fantasy than love—so
					it is not surprising that she does not care for her children. Scarlett’s
					instinct for self-preservation is so strong that it leaves little
					room for her to worry about the preservation of those to whom she
					feels no attachment. Each time she becomes pregnant, she reacts
					with a horror that would have been regarded as highly unnatural
					in her day. Scarlett exhibits none of the natural maternal thought
					essential to the feminine nature. Scarlett also dislikes her children
					because they resemble their fathers instead of her: Wade is timid
					and weak like Charles, and Ella is ugly and silly like Frank. Scarlett
					cares little for her husbands, so she cares little for the children
					of her husbands. Bonnie exhibits the selfishness and strong will
					that Rhett and Scarlett share, so she elicits feeling from Scarlett
					just as Rhett does.

	In this section, Rhett solidifies his position as the
					novel’s male hero. Throughout the novel, Mitchell makes it difficult
					for us to embrace Rhett, painting him as charming at times and downright obnoxious
					at others. Mitchell originally presents Rhett as an anti-Southern
					opportunist, although she endears him to us through his wit, strength,
					and charisma. He also charms us by refusing to fall under the spell
					of Scarlett’s charisma. He teases her and torments her about the
					same qualities that we may find annoying and repellent in Scarlett.
					In Chapter XXIII Rhett proves that some of his unpatriotic scoffing
					is just bluster when he joins the Confederate army. Now Rhett becomes
					even more respectable by supporting the Democrats and becoming a
					devoted and loving father. Rhett also shows that despite his seeming
					indifference he does care for Scarlett. He vehemently objects when
					she wants to endanger her life with a primitive method of abortion.
					Though Scarlett clings to her childhood passion for Ashley, she
					comes to rely increasingly on Rhett’s strength and love. As he becomes
					more and more important to Scarlet over the course of the novel,
					Rhett replaces Ashley as the dominant male figure. 

Rhett’s decision to change party loyalties foreshadows
					the coming shift in political power in the South. Rhett, who always
					caters to the group that is set to emerge wealthy and powerful,
					now deserts the Scalawags and Republicans to join the Democrats.
					As the Southern Democrats rebuild their party and the Republicans
					become increasingly corrupt and unpopular, Rhett transfers his loyalties and
					his money to the Democratic cause, showing that he cares more about
					his social position than his honor. He makes this shift for Bonnie’s
					sake, to regain the respect of Southern society, but he does it
					in accordance with his unerring instincts. Rhett’s shrewd political sense
					never fails, and, as he has sensed it would, Reconstruction soon
					draws to a close.

