Chapter Thirty-Three brings us the long-awaited truth
				about Snape, beginning with his childhood and stretching almost
				to his death. After reading his life story, we see the explanations
				of many of the mysteries and enigmas that have surrounded this character,
				and yet he remains full of intriguing contradictions.

As a child he both is and is not an appealing and likable
				character. We want to take his side, because he has a father who
				doesn’t love him and a mother who dresses him, to his humiliation,
				in ugly rags. Also appealing is his obvious devotion to Lily, his
				urgent desire to make her his friend. And yet he has already developed
				unattractive qualities out of his reaction to the obstacles he faces.
				He is secretive and closed to most people, and resentful of most
				of the world. He wants to be special, and wants to have a special
				friend in Lily, scorning her Muggle sister. And in his secretiveness
				and desire to be special, he is somewhat sneaky, opening Petunia’s
				letter and telling Lily about it.

These contradictions continue during his school years
				at Hogwarts, and come between him and Lily. He continues to adore
				her and stay loyal to her, but his contempt for the Muggles who
				mistreated him and his desire to be special lead him into pureblood views
				that are offensive to Lily, and lead him to associate with other Slytherins
				who see themselves as special and superior. His need to cling to
				Lily, which is the downside of his loyalty to her, leads him to jealously
				resent James Potter. He develops a mixture of bad qualities partially
				redeemed by his loyalty and love.

After Lily tells him that they’re no longer friends, Snape
				joins Voldemort and becomes a Death Eater. The one unforgivable
				thing he does is to tell Voldemort about Professor Trelawney’s prediction regarding
				the boy who can destroy Voldemort, unwittingly putting Lily Potter’s
				life in jeopardy. Yet Dumbledore offers him a chance to redeem himself,
				and Snape remains true to his promise even after Lily dies, staying
				faithful to her by protecting her son. Thereafter, the mixture of
				bad and good qualities is more a matter of surface appearance. On
				the surface, Snape appears to be greasy, sinister, and vindictive,
				but he is in reality the bravest and most reliable of Dumbledore’s
				supporters.

