Over dinner at the Oblonskys’, a guest makes a remark
					that displeases Karenin, who leaves the table. He finds Dolly in
					the drawing room and reveals to her his firm plans for divorce.
					Hearing that Anna has cheated on Karenin, Dolly protests that Anna
					will be ruined. Karenin claims there is nothing he can do.

At the same dinner, Levin and Kitty speak to each other
					for the first time since her rejection of his marriage proposal.
					Clearly still caring for each other greatly, they play a word game
					on a card table through which they apologize to each other for their
					past errors. Levin proposes to Kitty again, and she accepts. Later,
					Levin tells his brother Sergei of his engagement and wanders sleeplessly
					in the streets, overjoyed. When morning comes, Levin visits the Shcherbatsky
					house and embraces Kitty. In a happy daze, Levin goes off to buy
					flowers and presents for the engagement celebration. Levin, wishing
					to be fully honest with Kitty, shows her his journals, which divulge
					the fact that he is agnostic and has not been chaste prior to marriage.
					Kitty is upset but ultimately forgiving.

Karenin is passed over for a government post he has been
					coveting. Just after receiving this bad news, he receives a telegram announcing
					that Anna is gravely ill. He arrives to learn that Anna has delivered
					a baby girl, and that she is suffering from a fever from which she
					is not expected to recover. Vronsky is present at Anna’s bedside.
					Anna is sure she is dying, so she begs Karenin for forgiveness.
					She also implores Karenin to forgive Vronsky, which Karenin tearfully
					does.

When Vronsky is about to leave the house, Karenin tells
					him that he has forgiven Anna and will stay by her side. Vronsky
					departs with the feeling that his love for Anna, which has flagged
					lately, is reviving. Back at his home, he cannot sleep, tormented
					by the possibility of Anna’s death. Only half-aware of his actions,
					Vronsky aims a pistol at his chest and fires. He is gravely wounded
					but survives, as one of his servants quickly discovers him and sends
					for doctors.

Karenin, meanwhile, is surprised by how sincerely he was
					able to forgive Anna, and by the tenderness he feels toward her
					newborn daughter, who is also named Anna. Later, Karenin overhears
					a conversation between Anna and Betsy Tverskaya. Betsy implores
					Anna to say goodbye to Vronsky before he leaves for the provincial
					capital of Tashkent, where he is to be stationed. Anna refuses,
					saying that there is no point in seeing Vronsky again. On the way
					out, Betsy begs Karenin to allow Vronsky to visit Anna one last
					time. Karenin answers that such a matter is solely his wife’s decision.
					In desperate grief, Anna privately affirms to Karenin that there
					is no point in seeing Vronsky again. Karenin says he is willing
					to allow the affair to continue, provided that the family and children
					are not disgraced.

Stiva arrives at the Karenin house. Anna privately tells
					him that she cannot stand Karenin any longer. Stiva says the problem
					is simple: Anna married someone whom she did not love and who was twenty
					years her senior; now she loves another man, and she must decide
					whether or not to stay with her husband. Anna says she does not
					know what to do. Stiva speaks to Karenin, who shows him a letter
					he has begun writing to Anna. The letter tells Anna that the decision
					about the future of their marriage is entirely in her hands. Stiva says
					that only divorce will satisfy Anna, but Karenin reminds him of the
					disgrace she will suffer if she chooses such a path. Stiva mentions that
					Karenin could allow Anna to escape public shame by taking responsibility
					for the disgrace himself—by pretending that it was he, rather than
					Anna, who committed adultery. Karenin tearfully says that he is
					willing to accept this option.

Vronsky, hearing that Karenin has granted a divorce, visits
					Anna. They acknowledge their mutual love. Anna says that Karenin
					is being too generous with her, so she cannot accept his magnanimity in
					granting her wish for divorce proceedings. Vronsky resigns his commission,
					and he and Anna set off on a trip abroad, abandoning the idea of
					divorce.

Levin’s bliss at confirming his love for Kitty, and hearing
					her confirm it in return, is one of the most unforgettable portrayals
					of romantic love in all of literature. Yet this scene also fulfills
					a key function in the novel, reminding us of Tolstoy’s interest
					in exploring the relationship between reason and instinct in human
					life. Levin’s joy is irrational. His state approaches delirium as
					he loses control over his body and mind. He walks in the frigid
					Russian air without a coat, yet he does not feel cold. He tries
					to eat but feels no need of food, even though he has not eaten since
					the day before. He has not slept for two nights when he shows up
					in the morning at the Shcherbatsky residence in a blissful daze.
					This irrational episode puts Levin in stark contrast to Karenin,
					who, we suspect, has never had an irrational moment in his life.
					It also separates Levin from Vronsky, who always tries to maintain
					control over his life, as we see in his attempts to master Frou-Frou
					and settle his financial accounts methodically. Whereas Levin throws
					himself into love blindly and freely, Vronsky enters it in a controlling
					and self-possessed spirit. We ultimately sense that Tolstoy admires
					Levin’s love far more.

Our view of Karenin is jolted in these chapters when he
					breaks into tears and volunteers to accept guilt in the divorce
					proceedings. The tears themselves are a shock, as we have been told
					that Karenin hates nothing more than crying, which he considers
					irrational and odious. Here, however, Karenin’s intellectual and
					logical armor is pierced, and we get a glimpse of an emotional man
					within. Moreover, his assumption of guilt is unexpectedly and extraordinarily altruistic.
					As an important public personage, Karenin is well aware of the disgrace
					that would fall upon him and undoubtedly destroy his career. Honor
					is a paramount personal consideration for him—he says just a few
					chapters earlier that he is even willing to allow Anna to carry
					on her liaison as long as she does not threaten the honor of the
					family. Here, however, Karenin is willing not only to accept a divorce
					for Anna’s sake but also to sacrifice his own honor in the bargain.
					This sudden selflessness utterly shakes up our view of Karenin’s
					character, derailing our more cynical judgments about his attitude
					toward Anna’s adultery. Karenin is no passionate hero, but he is
					not a machine, as Anna calls him, either.

Anna’s deathbed plea for forgiveness for herself and Vronsky, and
					Karenin’s surprising assent, raise important questions about the moral
					and theological importance of forgiveness in this novel. Several
					of the staple Christian teachings of selflessness—turning the other
					cheek to wrongdoers, giving away one’s cloak when one’s coat has
					been stolen, and so on—are repeatedly cited in Anna Karenina. Karenin,
					in his sudden generosity, exemplifies these tenets in his willingness
					to forgive and forget everything. We see similar generosity in Levin’s
					and Kitty’s forgiveness of each other’s past decisions and actions.
					But forgiveness does not have a simple function in the novel; it
					is not a cure-all that can be universally offered and accepted.
					Indeed, the epigraph that begins Anna Karenina is
					a quotation from the New Testament (Romans 12:19)
					that evokes the harsher morality of the Old Testament from which
					it is borrowed (Deuteronomy 32:35): “Vengeance
					is mine; I shall repay.” This emphasis on vengeance, the very opposite
					of forgiveness, suggests that violent retribution may ultimately
					win out over meek humility. Indeed, we see that Anna asks for Karenin’s
					forgiveness but does not necessarily accept it, fleeing abroad with
					Vronsky at the end of Part Four. The role of forgiveness is not
					a clear-cut one in the world of the novel: though a powerful healing
					force in Levin and Kitty’s relationship, it may ultimately be rejected
					in favor of vengeance in Karenin and Anna’s.

