The community has located a pine tree and raised enough
					money to buy clothes for Jefferson. Grant’s class puts on a Christmas
					program and Reverend Ambrose delivers the introductory prayer, commenting
					on the foolishness of those who believe themselves educated when
					they have no love for the Lord. Grant contains his irritation. During
					the Christmas program, a particularly dramatic recitation of “’Twas
					the Night before Christmas” affects everyone deeply, but Grant becomes
					depressed thinking about the monotony of their routine. Every year
					they put on the same play and sing the same songs. He wonders whether
					anything will ever change in his town. A young child brings Grant
					some food, and he sits looking at the gift intended for Jefferson.

The date of Jefferson’s execution has been set, and Grant
					goes to Henri Pichot’s house. Reverend Ambrose has already arrived
					at Pichot’s, but Sheriff Guidry has not. The housekeeper assures
					Grant that Guidry is “on his way,” but Grant is dubious. After a
					few minutes, however, Guidry arrives. Guidry informs the others
					that Jefferson will die between noon and three on the second Friday
					after Easter. The Mayor did not want the execution to be any closer
					to Easter or during Lent. Grant bitterly thinks about the fact that twelve
					white men convicted Jefferson and now a white man has set the date
					of his death. He wonders how any man could set the date of another’s
					death and questions whether this procedure deserves to be called
					justice.

Grant visits Miss Emma, who lies under a quilt
					on her bed, looking extremely ill. Grant badly wants to leave, but
					he knows he should spend at least a few minutes there. After ten
					minutes, he returns to his aunt’s house where Vivian pays him a
					visit. Vivian says she wants to stop by Miss Emma’s but does not
					know whether it is a good time. Grant tells Vivian he wants her
					to be part of his life and that his aunt will have to accept that.
					They get out of bed and go to Miss Emma’s. Vivian whispers something into
					Miss Emma’s ear and Emma looks pleased.

	At the Rainbow Club, Grant and Vivian drink brandy, and
					he tells her why he thinks his aunt and Miss Emma ask so much of
					him. He says they want to take pride in him, just as Miss Emma wants
					to take pride in Jefferson. Vivian has put down her glass and says
					she does not understand. Grant says black men have historically
					failed to protect their women—either staying in the South and losing
					their will, or running away and leaving the women to look after
					the children. Grant insists that even those who try to change things
					will break because they must shoulder the burdens of all those who
					have failed before them. It is a vicious circle. Miss Emma and Tante
					Lou cling to Grant, he says, because they see that he is different
					from other men. They do not understand, however, that by holding
					on to him they force him to shoulder a terrible burden and facilitate
					his destruction. When Vivian asks how they can break the circle,
					Grant replies, “It’s up to Jefferson, my love.”

Although Grant wants to help his community, he feels powerless
					to do so. This feeling of powerlessness makes him bitter. At the
					Christmas program, he reflects that nothing changes: not the songs,
					not the clothes, not the people. Grant feels he cannot help or change these
					people, and in order to stop this failure from hurting him, he nurtures
					anger and contempt toward the people he says he wants to help. He
					fans the flames of his superiority and separates himself from the
					happiness of the group. Still, despite his best efforts to be callous,
					Grant notices sights and moments that depress him with their tenderness:
					a girl in his class gives a lovely and affecting reading of “’Twas
					the Night before Christmas”; a present for Jefferson sits against
					the pathetic Christmas tree, a present the children bought with
					their own contributions of nickels and dimes; a plate of food brought
					to Grant by a child who has noticed his misery.

	Reverend Ambrose’s introductory prayer challenges Grant
					to show true faith. The reverend thinks that when you believe in
					God, you not only comfort yourself, you take a step toward fighting
					the injustice of a white-dominated society. God is a source of hope, change,
					and rebellion. Moreover, if you have faith in God, you have faith
					in your people. Nevertheless, Grant is not up to that challenge, at
					least not yet. Reverend Ambrose’s sermon is a precursor for his diatribe
					against Grant in a later chapter.

One can interpret Grant’s statement, that Jefferson can
					play a powerful role in breaking the cycle of black men’s failures,
					in numerous ways. The statement might illustrate Grant’s new humility,
					as he shows that Jefferson, not Grant, will be the real hero for black
					men. At the same time, the statement might indicate Grant’s renewed
					belief in his own task—namely, the task of helping Jefferson regain
					his humanity. But one might also interpret the statement more cynically,
					as an indicator of Grant’s continued bitterness. By laying responsibility
					at Jefferson’s feet, Grant might be admitting that he himself cannot
					play the role of savior for the community. Or, Grant might
					be shirking his duties by saying the choice is Jefferson’s—if Grant
					fails to transform Jefferson into a dignified man, he will not have
					to take the blame. The numerous possible interpretations point to the
					complexity of Grant’s character. We already know that he often acts like
					both a cynic and a saint; it is certainly possible that he has both
					selfish and unselfish reasons for making this statement. 

	Gaines associates Christian imagery with Jefferson: like
					Christ, Jefferson has been unjustly sentenced to death by a society
					that fears and hates him. Also like Christ, Jefferson represents
					the potential for human change, and the manner in which he goes
					to his death will do either great harm or great good to the community.
					In the bar, Grant refers to Jefferson as a savior. Jefferson himself
					seems to sense the association, asking several times about Christ’s
					death. When the governor sets the execution date, he avoids Easter
					Sunday perhaps because he wishes to avoid associating Jefferson
					with Christ, and making a martyr of him. Because the governor pays
					attention to the symbolism of Easter Sunday, he gives the symbolism
					more weight and importance.

