The trees on Isle des Chevaliers are restless, but on
					Dominique, nature is beaten into submission by the tourist industry.
					There, Jadine sits at a hotel and waits for a ride to L’Arbe de
					la Croix. As she sits, she reflects on her decision to leave Son
					and feels that to stay with him would have been too difficult because
					of his ties to his culture. When her driver takes her past the swamp
					where she got stuck in the tar, she feels her legs burn from the
					memory.

When Jadine arrives at L’Arbe de la Croix, she finds Margaret cleaning
					out Valerian’s closet. Margaret tells her that Valerian is now feeble
					and also that Michael will attend Berkeley for graduate school.
					Margaret is tidying Valerian’s things and shows the pants that he
					has never worn, which are all made out of natural fibers like linen
					or silk. Margaret says that she now dresses Valerian and that Sydney
					will teach her to shave him. Leaving Margaret, Jadine finds Ondine
					in the kitchen, and she expresses surprise about Margaret’s new
					degree of power over Valerian. Ondine says that Valerian intentionally
					kept Margaret stupid and that his suffering is repayment. Jadine
					tries to explain her relationship with Son, but Ondine is not receptive.
					Still angry that Jadine left the island without a goodbye after
					Christmas, Ondine is also mad that she plans to fly to Paris. She believes
					that Jadine would not have returned to the island unless her sealskin
					coat was there, and she accuses Jadine of lacking proper affection
					for herself and Sydney. She thinks Jadine should stay and take care
					of them.

Ondine tells Jadine that her first priority is to be a
					daughter. If Jadine never learns to be a daughter, then according
					to Ondine, she will never grown up to be a real woman. Jadine rejects
					Ondine’s argument and says that she must go to Paris. She asks Ondine
					not to tell Son where she has gone. After Jadine leaves, Sydney
					enters the kitchen and agrees with Ondine that Jadine is ungrateful.
					Sydney then walks to the greenhouse, and he notices that the walkway’s bricks
					are coming loose and that ants are eating some electrical cords.
					He reflects that the island has disrupted their surroundings and
					as he enters the greenhouse, he comments to Valerian that the island
					is starting to get in bad condition.

Sydney cares for Valerian, who is very frail now. He also
					takes advantage of Valerian’s diminished state to turn off the radio
					and pour himself a glass of Valerian’s wine. He tells Valerian that
					he should get some sandals, which he will appreciate at this time
					next year. Valerian insists that he is going back to Philadelphia,
					but Sydney disagrees. The power dynamic has shifted, and now the
					servant is making the decisions.

At the airport, Jadine encounters Alma Estée, who is now
					a bathroom attendant, and Jadine does not remember her. Alma Estée wears
					a cheap wig and asks if Jadine killed Son. Jadine thinks that Alma
					Estée looks like an animal, and she gives her a couple of francs as
					she leaves to board her plane. When Jadine says goodbye, she calls
					Alma “Mary.” On the plane Jadine gives herself a manicure and decides
					that she will stop asking herself what went wrong with Son. As the
					plane flies, it sails far above marching columns of soldier ants.
					The narrator tells the story of the queen ant, who only copulates
					once in her lifetime. After the act, the male ant dies, and the queen
					saves his sperm in her womb until the time comes for her to found
					a colony. In the story, the queen ant wonders about what the male
					ant thought as he quivered and died.

Son arrives in Queen of France in pursuit of Jadine and
					stops in the market, where he finds Thérèse. She is very happy to
					see him again and tells him that Gideon now works as a taxi driver.
					Together they walk to find Gideon, and Gideon tells Son that if
					Son is going to Isle des Chevaliers, he hopes Son plans to commit
					murder. Son says he has to find Jadine, and Gideon says that Son
					must leave her be. Alma Estée enters wearing her cheap wig, and
					her appearance in the wig makes Son sad. He tries to take it off,
					but she jumps away. She tells Son about seeing Jadine at the airport,
					and Son continues to feel that he must follow her.

Gideon refuses to take Son to the island, but Thérèse
					offers to take him instead. Practically blind, she must navigate
					by the currents. As they drive in her boat, the sky gets foggier
					until Son can barely see. Thérèse leaves Son on the backside of
					the island, far away from L’Arbe de La Croix, and after he steps
					ashore, she yells after him that he has a choice. Thérèse says that
					he can either join the island’s wild horsemen, who are waiting for
					him, or he can go after Jadine. She believes he must join the horsemen
					and reunite with his heritage. Son stumbles onto shore, and as he
					picks up speed his vision fades, and the island opens to accommodate
					him as he joins the horsemen running.

At the opening of Chapter Ten, the narrator describes
					how nature is preparing to reclaim its ground. The military language
					that the narrator uses to describe the daisy trees indicates the
					severity of the conflict between nature and civilization. The trees
					are ready to take Isle des Chevaliers back from humanity, even if
					the island of Dominique remains a tourist trap. This language of
					nature resurgent leads to Son’s final decision to join the wild
					horsemen. Nature’s preparation for war also emphasizes the changes
					that are taking place within the house. Ensconced in his overgrown
					garden, Valerian is gradually becoming a weak force in his own household.
					Margaret emphasizes how much Valerian’s relationship to nature has
					been reversed when she mentions off-handedly to Jadine that Mother
					Nature has made everything he owns. The connection between youth
					and power that runs throughout the novel is shown here to be part
					of a natural cycle of decline and emergence. As Valerian grows weaker,
					younger forces will rise up to take his place.

The reversal of Valerian’s relationship to nature is mirrored
					in the reversal of Sydney’s relationship to Valerian. The servant
					is now becoming the master, as he makes decisions regarding the
					management of the house and of Valerian’s life. Valerian does not
					know what is right or wrong anymore because he is still shocked
					over Margaret’s abuse of Michael. This confusion allows Sydney to
					make all the decisions for Valerian. As throughout the novel, the
					narrator here draws a parallel between the black characters and
					nature itself. The island’s trees are in ascendance over the house
					just as Sydney has been telling Valerian what to do. The loose bricks
					in the walkway and the ants chewing on the electrical cords also
					emphasize nature’s takeover. So, as Valerian loses control over
					his life, nature and the black characters in the house begin to
					take over.

The appearance of Alma Estée with Jadine draws a connection between
					the two characters. Although Alma does not have the same upbringing
					as Jadine, she tries to hide her heritage as Jadine does. Alma now
					wears a wig similar to the one that she asked Son to bring her earlier
					in the book. The wig’s reddish brown color does not match her skin,
					nor does it effectively hide her true hair, which Jadine can see
					peeking out from underneath. Nevertheless, Alma has persisted in
					trying to deny her heritage by covering her hair, and Jadine persists
					in calling her “Mary,” although she has been told already that the
					women of the island have different names. This interaction indicates
					that Jadine will never accept where she came from and will keep
					running away, just as she decided to leave Sydney and Ondine for
					Paris. 

The novel’s two protagonists, Son and Jadine, show the
					least change in their perspectives at this point in Tar
						Baby. At the beginning of the novel, Jadine had arrived
					on Isle des Chevaliers from Europe, uncertain about her goals in
					life and how they related to her race and heritage. Now she is uneasily
					yet firmly preparing to return to Europe to pick up her career and
					her relationship with the white man Ryk. She is wounded and angry
					more than she is changed. When she feels the burning memory of tar
					while passing the swamp on the way to the house, she simultaneously
					feels entrapped in a relationship with a backward man. Ondine tries
					to show her a way to navigate between the complete rejection of
					her history and returning to Son’s poor black culture when she tells
					Jadine that she needs to be a daughter. She is not asking Jadine
					to change her life, just to care about where she is from. But even
					caring about where she came from is too much for Jadine. She remains
					unsure about her future and seems to reject her race and heritage
					by returning to Paris. In contrast, Son stays true to his race and
					heritage. Although he accommodates civilization over nature when
					he goes to New York, he only moves there because he loves Jadine,
					not because he really wants to live in New York. However, once Son
					is away from New York and in Eloe or on the island, he displays
					that he is a part of nature and his heritage.

The metaphor of the reproductive cycle of the queen ant
					stands in for Jadine’s feelings in her last appearance in Tar
						Baby. The soldier ants have appeared throughout the novel
					as symbols of nature, and nature’s treatment has been overwhelmingly
					positive throughout the book. Here, however, the narrator draws
					a clear connection between Jadine’s need for freedom and the queen’s
					method of reproduction. The death of the male ant may be surprising,
					but viewed as a natural phenomenon the death is also inevitable.
					The description indicates that Jadine’s choice is also natural and
					therefore must be accepted. When Jadine decides to stop thinking
					of what went wrong with Son, she acknowledges there is no chance
					their relationship could work. Like the queen ant, she also leaves
					someone behind and forces herself to look at what lies ahead in
					her life. Also similar to the queen ant, Jadine may look back and
					wonder if Son has realized what he lost.

Son, in contrast to Jadine, initially appears to have
					changed in his rejection of Eloe that ended the previous chapter.
					Yet although he has returned to the island to find Jadine, there
					is no indication in his words or actions that he has changed his
					perspective in a way that will allow them to reconcile. Although
					he has given up on Eloe, he does not appear to have given up on
					his insistence that the white man’s civilized world is irredeemably
					corrupt. He appears to be driven back to the island by a blind hunger
					to be reunited with Jadine rather than by a more fundamental change
					in his outlook. That is why, once he has learned that Jadine is
					gone, he is open to the possibility of becoming a horseman. Although
					the narrator intentionally leaves the final paragraph somewhat ambiguous,
					it is clear from the language and context that Son ultimately chooses
					to join the wild men of the island. He has given up on being united
					with Jadine, but he has also given up on the hope of returning home
					to Eloe. At the most profound level, Son is first and foremost connected
					with nature, and ultimately he finds his way to the part of the world
					where he belongs.

