Rachel becomes increasingly withdrawn as she repeatedly
					miscarries. Bilhah offers to go to Jacob and bear a son on her behalf. Rachel
					accepts her offer gratefully, and Jacob agrees. Bilhah goes to his
					tent that very night and returns the next day no longer a maiden but
					not a true bride of Jacob. Jacob calls Bilhah to him often, as Rachel
					is frequently away attending births and Leah is nursing. Bilhah
					becomes pregnant and gives birth to a healthy boy, Dan. By law, since
					she is Rachel’s handmaiden and not Jacob’s true bride, the baby
					belongs to Rachel. Rachel has grown kindhearted from her experiences
					delivering babies and places the boy in Bilhah’s arms. Rachel’s
					desire for children is reaffirmed, and she goes to Jacob and begs
					him to give her children. They find pleasure with each other again.

Leah commands Zilpah to go to Jacob’s bed for the first
					time. Zilpah goes, hoping that at twenty-five she is too old to
					bear children. She takes no pleasure in Jacob’s touch but performs
					her duty. She conceives and dreams of giving birth to a daughter.
					When her time comes, the labor lasts for three days and she gives
					birth to twins, Gad and Asher. Zilpah, half‑dead, lies still for
					several days. Soon after, she tells Jacob that she has given him
					two sons but that another pregnancy will kill her. He never calls
					her to his bed again. Leah’s next pregnancy also brings twin boys,
					Naphtali and Issachar.

Jacob now has four wives and ten sons. He is uneasy, however,
					as technically Laban owns most everything he tends. Laban treats
					his daughters cruelly, growing fat off the profits of his son‑in‑law
					and beating his wife, Ruti. One day, Ruti begs Rachel for an herb
					to end her pregnancy, for she does not want to give Laban another
					son. Rachel and her sisters agree to perform an abortion at the
					next new moon. The new moon comes, and in the red tent Rachel mixes
					a strong black brew which Ruti drinks. She miscarries quickly but does
					not cry out in pain.

After seven sons, Leah feels that she can no longer give
					birth. She drinks fennel to prevent pregnancy but runs out of the
					herb. Leah realizes she has become pregnant again and asks Rachel
					to help her miscarry as Ruti did. Rachel tells her not to do it,
					since she carries a girl. Rachel offers to take on Leah’s workload
					during her pregnancy. Leah agrees, and the sisters begin to dream
					collectively about the arrival of their first daughter.

Dinah is born in an easy birth, with Leah supported on
					the midwife’s brick on all sides by her sisters and Inna. Dinah
					stays in the red tent with her mother for the first two months,
					and the sisters shower her with affection. Just after Dinah’s birth,
					Rachel finally conceives. In her eighth month, she begins to feel
					sick. She grows pale and her hair falls out. Inna arrives to assist
					and discovers that the baby is breech birth, with its legs coming
					out first. Inna tries to turn the baby around, and two days pass
					while Rachel screams and bleeds. After three days and three nights,
					the baby turns. The baby Joseph is born small and wrinkled. Rachel
					recovers slowly but cannot breastfeed. The duty falls to Leah, who
					is nursing Dinah already.

As the abused wife of Laban, the fictional character of
					Ruti stands outside the tight-knit community of women in Jacob’s
					tribe. Ruti’s character has no roots in the Bible and is completely
					Diamant’s creation. Through Ruti, Diamant illustrates the hopeless
					circumstances of an abused wife and draws a cruel sketch of Laban’s character.
					Ruti is not a dowered wife like Leah and Rachel, nor does she have
					a family around her to provide support. She is at the beck and call
					of an abusive husband and living at a time where she has no recourse
					for his actions. Laban takes no care to treat his wife well and
					uses her as a slave, teaching their sons to treat her in the same manner.
					There is a contrast between Laban’s treatment of Ruti and Jacob’s
					treatment of his four wives. While the polygamist family is not
					without its problems, it does not compare to Ruti’s abusive family
					situation. Ruti attempts to resist Laban’s authority by refusing
					to give him another son and, in doing so, maintains a measure of
					control over her body. The women rush to her aid and support her within
					the world of the red tent. Outside the tent, she is not one of them,
					and they ultimately keep their distance to avoid trouble. 

Rachel’s character undergoes a metamorphosis throughout
					the first several chapters of the novel—from a childish, spoiled
					beauty into a strong, talented healer. She has difficulty conceiving
					a child and thus must find fulfillment in other areas of her life.
					Through her practice as a midwife, Rachel develops a sense of her
					own power and an identity other than just being the beauty. Though
					she is not as lucky in childbearing as her sisters, she cultivates
					her own kind of power in the red tent. By serving mothers in birth,
					she finds her own humanity and tenderness. As a result of this fundamental
					change in her personality, coupled with the joy of Dinah’s birth,
					she opens herself up to Jacob again. Fully confident now in her
					status as a woman, her womb seems to strengthen, and she is able
					to carry the baby to term. Dinah’s birth also contributes to the
					softening of her relationship with Leah. Without the constant jealousy,
					Rachel becomes more relaxed and accepting. Despite her experience
					in attending births, her own labor is difficult and she nearly dies,
					but her will to give Jacob a son and finally hold her own child
					in her arms prevails. The last vestiges of the old Rachel emerge
					when she resents handing her son to her fertile sister to breastfeed
					when her own breasts cannot feed him, but she at last accepts the
					situation.

Dinah’s troubled entrance into the world foreshadows her
					difficult life. After countless miscarried female babies among the
					sisters, Leah conceives yet another girl. The birth of so many sons
					has left Leah tired and she cannot bear the thought of another pregnancy and
					childbirth. Dinah’s destiny as the daughter of the wives of Jacob becomes
					clear when Rachel, an unlikely candidate, encourages Leah to keep
					the baby. After years of divided loyalties and emotions, the two
					sisters find something to rejoice about together and they dream of
					one girl who will live on as the legacy of the four sisters. Dinah
					is anxiously dreamed of for months, then is born into four pairs
					of loving hands. Dinah’s dramatic welcome to the world suits a character that
					is later the catalyst for the slaughter of a city.

