One day a Yankee cavalryman rides up to Tara and enters
					the house with his pistol drawn, looking for loot. Scarlett shoots
					him point-blank with Charles’s pistol. As he falls down dead, she
					sees Melanie at the top of the stairs carrying Charles’s sword.
					For the first time, Scarlett feels admiration for Melanie. They
					discover money in the Yankee’s pockets. Though shocked by the thought
					that she has killed, Scarlett feels justified in defending Tara
					and happy to have the Yankee’s precious money and horse.

	Scarlett visits the nearby Fontaine plantation and finds
					the women eager to share their meager supplies. Scarlett tells her
					troubles to Old Miss Fontaine, who warns Scarlett to save something
					to fear lest she become too cold and hardened. To Scarlett’s chagrin, Old
					Miss Fontaine says that at one point in her life she picked cotton to
					support her father and she never considered herself white trash for
					doing so. Scarlett returns to Tara and takes up the work of picking
					cotton, which she considers humiliating “slave work.” Only Dilcey
					helps her. Mammy and Pork insist that, as house workers, they will
					not perform field hand labor. Melanie is still too weak for laboring.
					Still, now that she has food, money, and a horse, Scarlett believes
					the worst is over.

In mid-November the family learns that the Yankee army
					is again marching toward Tara. Terrified of losing the food and
					the house, Scarlett sends everyone into the swamp to hide with the
					animals and the food. She keeps Melanie’s baby with her. Scarlett
					refuses to abandon Tara and meets the Yankees at the front door.
					A swarm of soldiers pours in around her, destroying everything they
					do not steal. One soldier tries to take Wade’s grandfather’s sword,
					which is now Wade’s birthright, but Scarlett persuades the Yankee
					sergeant to stop him. The enraged soldier runs into the kitchen
					and sets the place on fire as the Yankees stream out of the house.
					With great effort, Scarlett and Melanie succeed in putting out the
					fire. Scarlett’s contempt for Melanie once again gives way to grudging
					admiration.

Around Christmastime, a man named Frank Kennedy and a
					few Confederate soldiers visit Tara, looking for food for the army.
					Frank tells Scarlett and Melanie that General Sherman has burned
					Atlanta to the ground, although Aunt Pittypat’s house escaped the
					destruction. Frank confides in Scarlett that the end is near, and
					he finally becomes engaged to Scarlett’s sister Suellen after years
					of courtship.

By April the war is over, and Scarlett, relieved rather
					than dejected, makes plans to plant cotton for next year’s market.
					The roads are safe once again, and neighbors help each other get
					back on their feet.

Streams of returning Confederate soldiers begin passing
					through Tara, and Scarlett grudgingly offers them hospitality, sharing
					Tara and her food with them. A soldier named Will Benteen, a working-class
					Georgian with a wooden leg, stays on to help with the plantation.
					He is a godsend, quietly and competently assisting with the land.
					He falls in love with Scarlett’s sister Carreen, whose devotion to
					her prayer books and memories of Brent Tarleton prevent her from
					noticing Will’s attentions. One day, Uncle Peter, a slave, comes from
					Aunt Pittypat’s house with a letter from Ashley. Ashley is alive and
					walking home from Illinois. Anxious weeks pass, and Ashley finally
					arrives. Melanie runs down the front path to meet him and Scarlett
					starts to run after her, but Will grabs her skirt to stop her. He gently
					reminds her that Ashley is Melanie’s husband.

Scarlett must adapt quickly to keep pace with the quick
					changes facing the South. Starvation, the chaos of the war, and
					the lack of help transform Scarlett from a spoiled coquette into
					a hardened woman. She stoops to levels she could never have imagined
					in her old life. Although she adapts, however, Scarlett does not
					really change. She simply gives free reign to the tendencies once
					considered shamefully unladylike. In some ways, Scarlett has always
					had a personality ideally suited to disaster. Her old cunning and
					selfishness now serve her well, and by developing traits she always
					possessed she becomes completely self-sufficient and competent.
					Because Scarlett has never held to the standards of the old times,
					she has no trouble dropping them now. She is determined to “change
					with changing ways,” as Old Miss Fontaine puts it. Scarlett and
					Rhett stand out among the novel’s Southern characters for their
					chameleon-like ability to adapt to a new set of conventions. 

	During the hard months at Tara, Melanie becomes mentally stronger,
					and we start to see her as an alternative heroine to Scarlett. Melanie
					retains her kind heart, timidity, and physical frailty, but she gains
					a quiet, fiery determination. She helps Scarlett put out the fire set
					by the Yankee, and, in one of the novel’s most memorable scenes, tries
					to defend Tara against the Yankee thief by wielding a sword too heavy
					for her to lift. Melanie is just as brave as Scarlett, enduring
					the same hardships and exhibiting the same steely determination
					to survive, but Melanie’s bravery is untarnished by the selfishness
					and ruthlessness that drive Scarlett. Melanie’s belief in helping
					others and in maintaining Southern values motivates her heroic actions. Mitchell
					suggests that Melanie possesses a more worthy breed of heroism than
					Scarlett does, but she also suggests that because Melanie lacks
					Scarlett’s nastiness she will not survive the new order. Like Ashley,
					Melanie represents the Old South, a South that cannot survive in
					the post–Civil War era. The weakening of Melanie’s body parallels
					the weakening of the South. As Melanie becomes sick during pregnancy
					in Atlanta, Atlanta becomes sick. As Melanie totters around Tara,
					Atlanta struggles to stay alive. Despite their struggles, however,
					both Melanie and the South maintain their pride and gentility.

	Mitchell’s use of derogatory terms for specific ethnic
					or socioeconomic groups causes many readers discomfort. Throughout
					the novel, white characters and black house slaves refers to field
					hands as “darkies,” “niggers,” and “free-issue trash.” Poor whites
					are labeled “white trash” and “crackers.” Many of these racist and
					classist terms, offensive though they may be, were part of the common language
					of the time period in which the novel is set. Mitchell researched
					her novel meticulously, and in order to paint a true-to-life picture,
					she used the idiom of the Old South. However, while historical accuracy
					can explain some characters’ use of this language, historical accuracy
					does not compel the house slave Pork to talk of “trashy niggers.”
					Pork uses this language solely to denounce other black people. Surely
					a self-hating individual such as Pork could have existed in the
					Civil War South, but Mitchell fails to depict such an individual’s
					more numerous counterparts, who hated the torture they suffered
					at the hands of white oppressors, and who longed to regain their
					dignity.

	The slaves depicted in Gone with the Wind, especially
					the freed slaves, are stereotypes rather than real people. Historically,
					some slaves remained loyal to their white owners after the Civil
					War, but many of them left to find the freedom they had long been
					denied. Mitchell thus paints an unrealistic picture when she writes
					that not a single house servant deserts Tara. Mitchell buys in to
					the white party line of the Civil War era, which held that slaves
					loved and needed their masters. In this novel slaves profess overwhelming
					and unrealistic loyalty to white families. For instance, in Chapter
					XVII, Big Sam digs trenches with pride because he thinks he is helping
					gentle white people to hide. Mitchell makes Big Sam not only loyal
					to his slave-owners but also naïve and childish, and therefore in
					need of white guidance and support. Mitchell also stereotypes slaves
					as dishonest, having Prissy, for example, lie about having experience delivering
					babies. Gone with the Wind contains multiple derogatory descriptions
					of blacks; it perpetuates negative stereotypes rather than investigating
					the black position in the South at the time of the Civil War.

