Since the previous book was about the "Passion of Love," this book will probe
					the notion of love even further. The narrator defines love by means of four
					points: first, there are minds that do not experience love; second, love cannot
					be ruled by lust; third, love does seek self-satisfaction; lastly, when love
					acts toward one of the opposite sex, it appeals to lust for help. The narrator
					believes many people exist who enjoy giving happiness to others and this is the
					highest form of love.

Back at Western's house, everyone celebrates Allworthy's recovery except
					for Sophia. Her father does not notice Sophia's melancholy, but Mrs.
					Western, who has "lived about the Court, and  seen the World," quickly
					discerns that Sophia has fallen in love. Although Mrs. Western has not suffered
					this state herself, she is as well read in love as she is in politics. When Mrs.
					Western tells her brother that Sophia is in love with Mr. Blifil, Western is
					furious that Sophia has fallen in love without his permission. Mrs. Western
					pities his "Country Ignorance," while he scorns her "Town Learning." Mrs.
					Western eventually wins the Squire's approval of the match, but he worries that
					Allworthy will not agree to it, since "Money hath no Effect" on him. The Squire
					believes that "Petticoats should not meddle" in politics, but when Mrs. Western
					threatens to leave, the Squire remembers that he is to inherit her fortune, and
					tries to mollify her. She suggests that they "sign a Treaty of Peace."

Sophia suspects that her aunt has realized her affection for Tom, and she
					attempts to conceal her feelings by paying more attention to Blifil than to Tom.
					This baffles Mrs. Western, who reckons that Sophia's behavior must be "extreme
					Art in Sophia" to deflect her from the truth. Mr. Western invites Allworthy to
					dinner and proposes a match between Sophia and Blifil directly afterward.
					Allworthy considers the "Alliance" to be a sensible one, and greatly praises
					Sophia. He appreciates Sophia's grand fortune, but will only ratify the plan
					only if Sophia and Blifil profess mutual tenderness. This answer upsets Western,
					who believes that parents have a better knack for choosing marriage partners
					than their children. The narrator suggests that Allworthy is an avatar of
					moderation.

Allworthy proposes the match to Blifil, who admits he has not once entertained
					the thought of marrying Sophia. His appetites, the narrator confides, are so
					moderate that they can easily be supplanted with philosophy or study. Since
					Blifil does possess a healthy portion of "Avarice and Ambition," however, he
					gravitates toward the idea of Sophia's fortune. Allworthy disapproves of the
					cold answer from Blifil; Allworthy himself "possessed much Fire in his Youth,
					and had married a beautiful Woman for Love." Blifil subdues Allworthy's concern
					with a learned exposition on "Love and Marriage." Allworthy and Western, by
					letter, arrange a courtship opportunity for the young lovers.

Mrs. Western finds Sophia reading in her bedroom and they debate the merits of
					the book. Mrs. Western tells Sophia that she has long perceived the aura of love
					about her. Sophia need disclose her passion no further, since Squire Western has
					proposed the match to Allworthy, who has wholeheartedly complied. Sophia,
					overcome with surprise and joy, blurts out: "So brave, and yet so gentle; so
					witty, yet so inoffensive; so humane, so civil, so genteel, so handsome! What
					signifies his being base born, when compared with such Qualifications as these?"
					The words "base born" alert her aunt to the fact that they are talking about
					different men. Mrs. Western is enraged that Sophia can consider dishonoring the
					prestigious Western family line by marrying a bastard. Sophia begs Mrs. Western
					not to tell her father her secret. Her aunt agrees on the condition that Sophia
					will agree to meet Blifil that afternoon.

Mrs. Honour finds Sophia in tears and begs Sophia to tell her what has happened,
					even though she has, in fact, been listening to the conversation through the
					keyhole. Mrs. Honour responds to Sophia's dire news with a long speech in her
					country dialect. She believes Sophia should be free to choose the man she finds
					"most handsomest." After Honour mentions having seen Tom walking by the canal
					that morning, Sophia immediately dons her hat, but, deciding that the ribbon in
					the hat does not suit her, orders Honour to fetch her another. The ribbon
					exchange results in Sophia's missing Tom by a few minutes. The narrator takes
					this opportunity to warn all female readers against vanity.

Blifil and Sophia have an awkward courtship meeting. For the first quarter of an
					hour Blifil can hardly get a word out. Suddenly he breaks into a "Torrent of
					farfetched and high-strained Compliments." Sophia bears as much as she can, then
					exits the room. Blifil leaves perfectly satisfied with the meeting, since he
					does not care about possessing Sophia's heart, but only "her Fortune and her
					Person." Blifil entertains no idea that Tom loves Sophia because Tom has stopped
					confiding in Blifil since their brawl. Western begins to "caper and dance about
					his Hall" when he hears from Blifil how successfully the meeting went. Seeing
					that her father is so happy, Sophia decides this is the best time to break the
					bad news to him. Confirming first that her father does indeed "place all his Joy
					in his Sophy's Happiness," Sophia begs him not to force her to marry a man whom
					she utterly despises. Mr. Western damns Sophia and threatens to turn her out of
					the house. He agrees to let Tom try to talk some sense into the girl.

Sophia trembles with fear when Tom appears in her room. Tom laments that he
					has been sent by Mr. Western to praise Blifil to Sophia. He declares his love
					for her and intimates that he hopes to have some in return. Sophia, however,
					warns of the terrible repercussions of crossing her father. It will be the ruin
					of Tom, and therefore of herself. Tom says that he fears nothing except losing
					Sophia. The lovers cannot draw their hands from each other. The narrator breaks
					the chapter, since some readers might think it has "lasted long enough."

During the conversation in the previous chapter, Mrs. Western chanced to meet
					her brother in the hall. Hearing that Tom is with Sophia, Mrs. Western decides
					that Sophia has breached her trust. She divulges Sophia's secret to Squire
					Western, who cannot comprehend that Sophia would fall in love with a poor man.
					In his eyes, equality of fortune is as necessary to a marriage as difference of
					sex. Western descends on the two lovers, who are compared to two quaking doves.
					Finding that his daughter has fainted, however, Western ignores Tom and rushes
					to the assistance of Sophia. Western then curses Tom and the local parson urges
					Tom to leave.

Allworthy, satisfied with Blifil's account of the courtship, sincerely wishes
					for the match between his nephew and Sophia. Western suddenly appears and
					accuses Allworthy of "breeding up a Bastard like a Gentleman, and letting un
					come about to Vok's Houses." Allworthy reminds Western that he was averse to
					Tom's spending so much time at Western's estate. Allworthy asks if the Squire
					has observed any tokens of love between Sophia and Tom. The Squire has not.

Blifil declares that he will continue his pursuit of Sophia and calls Tom "one
					of the worst Men in the World." Allworthy asks what he means by this. Blifil
					tells Allworthy a completely distorted story about Tom's behavior during
					Allworthy's illness. He says that Tom drank and danced every night, and that
					when Blifil tried to calm him, Tom beat him. Allworthy calls on Thwackum so
					as to "examine all the Evidence of this Matter." Thwackum confirms everything
					Blifil has said and displays his bruises from the fight.

Allworthy confronts Tom with the story, omitting his own illness, which forces
					Tom to admit to his drunkenness. Tom is so stunned that he cannot excuse
					himself, and instead decides to confess to everything and beg mercy of
					Allworthy. Allworthy insists that he has given Tom too much forgiveness in the
					past, and thus sends him out in the world with some money to support himself
					until he finds a job to make an honest living. He particularly disapproves of
					Tom's behavior toward Blifil, who has treated Tom with the utmost "Tenderness
					and Honour." The neighbors criticize Allworthy for his harshness to Tom,
					overlooking the fact that Allworthy sent Tom away with no less than five hundred
					pounds.

The banished Tom sits by a brook and tears out his hair like a Homeric
						hero. His biggest quandary rests in how to deal with Sophia. He
					is worried about breaking his own heart by leaving her, but he cannot entertain
					the idea of "reducing her to Ruin and Beggary," or of betraying Allworthy's
					wishes. Tom decides the most honorable action is to leave Sophia, and he writes
					her a letter explaining this. He cannot find any wax to seal the letter, since,
					in a fit, he threw out everything, including the five hundred pounds from
					Allworthy. Black George has already found the book and pocketed it, but
					helps Tom search for it all the same. He promises to deliver Tom's letter to
					Mrs. Honour. Tom receives a letter from Sophia in return, promising that she
					will marry no other. Tom reads and kisses the letter one hundred times, then
					departs from the estate.

Sophia has passed the day listening to lectures from her aunt about how women
					should exercise Prudence and seek marriages for money. Western confines Sophia
					to her room and gives the key to Honour. Sophia weeps over Tom's letter, and
					Honour tries to console her by praising Blifil's appearance and manners. Sophia
					sends all her money—sixteen guineas—to Tom. Honour gives the money
					to Black George who, after some deliberation, gives it to Tom.
				

Mrs. Western chastises her brother for incarcerating Sophia and for ruining all
					the good she has done with her lectures on prudence. She reminds him of her
					superior knowledge of the world. When Western invokes politics in his rant, Mrs.
					Western says he should think about Sophia, who is "in greater Danger than the
					Nation." The Squire eventually agrees to turn Sophia's care over to his sister,
					but only because "Women are the properest to manage Women." 


					Book VI fleshes out the beleaguered love affair of Tom and Sophia, who
					must rally against Squire Western's traditional view of marriage. Marriages
					based on fortune were prevalent in Fielding's era, and are condoned by both
					Mrs. Western and by Mr. Allworthy. Sophia's filial piety creates a
					further obstruction to the consummation of the lovers' affection for one
					another.
				

Tom's banishment from at the end of Book VI foreshadows a shift in the story's
					milieu, from a static depiction of two country households to the constantly
					changing environment brought on by travel. Indeed, Fielding's own concerns seem
					to widen in Book VI, as evidenced by his frequent references to the political
					conflicts of the time. Western's character is a satire of the conservative
					country gentleman who opposes the new Hanoverian government led by King George
					II. In Chapter II, Squire Western reads the London Evening-Post, a Tory
					newspaper that criticized the Whig government, and which Fielding criticized in
					some of his other writings.
				

Where Mrs. Western is thus the stock "city woman," Squire Western is the stock
					"country man"—making the pair a caricature of the country-city rivalry
					prevalent in Fielding's time. Their interactions also provide insight into the
					relationship between men and women of the day. The Squire argues that
					"Petticoats should not meddle" in political affairs, while Mrs. Western claims
					to have a "sovereign Contempt" for the male sex. In Chapter XIV, she remarks:
					"English Women, Brother, I thank Heaven, are no Slaves. We are not to be locked
					up like the Spanish and Italian Wives. We have as good a Right to Liberty as
					yourselves." The tension between the Squire's violent methods of dealing with
					Sophia and Mrs. Western's gentle, diplomatic conversations with her niece will
					flourish into a point of contention throughout the novel.
				

