Scarlett returns to Tara for Gerald’s funeral. Will Benteen
					tells her that Suellen, desperate for more money, tried to trick
					Gerald into taking the oath of loyalty to the Union. Men who swear
					loyalty to the Union receive compensation for property lost during
					the war. Will says that Suellen got Gerald drunk and got him to
					agree to sign anything. Although drunk, Gerald realized what was
					about to happen and ripped up the oath. He mounted his horse and
					rode away. When he tried to jump a fence, his horse pitched him
					off, killing him upon impact. Will shocks Scarlett by telling her
					that he plans to marry Suellen so that he can stay at Tara forever.

When she sees Tara, Scarlett’s heart surges with love.
					Ashley performs the funeral service and Will asks to say a few words.
					To keep any of the mourners from criticizing Suellen, Will announces
					their engagement and asks that no one else speak after him. Old
					Miss Fontaine tells Scarlett that the secret to success lies in
					changing with the changing times, rising up after misfortune, and
					using people and then discarding them. Scarlett finds the speech
					confusing and dull.

After the funeral, Scarlett gives Gerald’s gold watch
					to Pork as a reward for his faithful service. Upon learning that
					Ashley intends to move to New York with Melanie, Scarlett appeals
					to him to take a half-interest in the mill and live in Atlanta.
					Ashley refuses, ashamed to live on her charity and tormented by
					his love for Scarlett. When Scarlett begins to cry, Melanie rushes
					into the room. She learns of Scarlett’s offer and urges Ashley to
					accept it in order to repay Scarlett’s kindness and let Beau grow
					up in Atlanta rather than in the hostile North. Ashley accepts the
					offer at the expense of his honor. 

After Suellen and Will’s wedding, Carreen enters a convent,
					and Ashley, Melanie, and Beau move into a little house in Atlanta
					adjacent to Aunt Pittypat’s house. Melanie’s optimism, generosity,
					and adherence to old Southern values make her house the social nucleus for
					proud Southern families. Ashley proves incompetent at wringing profits
					from the labor of the freed slaves, so Scarlett announces her intention
					to lease convicts to work in her mills.

Scarlett gives birth to an ugly baby girl and names her
					Ella Lorena. Scarlett is desperate to get back to the mill, but
					Frank forbids her to return. Atlanta has become dangerous, and Frank
					worries for Scarlett’s safety. The Yankees, he says, are trying
					to root out the Ku Klux Klan, and anger has begun to brew among
					the freed slaves in areas like Shantytown. A one-legged, one-eyed
					mountain man named Archie begins to work as Scarlett’s escort into
					town. Rude and intimidating, Archie quickly becomes an Atlanta institution,
					chaperoning women around town. When Archie hears about Scarlett’s plan
					to lease convicts to work in the mills, he threatens to stop assisting
					her. He tells her he was a convict for forty years after murdering his
					adulterous wife, and says that convict leasing is worse than slave ownership.

	Scarlett learns that the Georgia legislature has refused
					to ratify a Constitutional amendment granting blacks citizenship.
					Though many Southerners take pride in the legislature’s resolve,
					Scarlett realizes it will make the Yankees even harder on Atlanta.
					She leases ten convicts to work in her mills, hiring a Yankee Irishman
					named Johnnie Gallegher as their foreman. Atlanta is appalled at
					Scarlett’s actions, and Archie quits as promised, but Gallegher
					gets an astonishing amount of work out of his men. To Scarlett’s
					dismay, Gallegher fares far better than Ashley as a manager.

Despite the Northerners’ efforts to crush Southern society
					through Reconstruction, the South slowly rebuilds itself. Many characters marry,
					often in matches that would have been unthinkable in the days before
					the war. Suellen’s marriage to the poor white man Will Benteen is
					such a match. In prewar times, a poor man like Will would not have
					dreamed of wooing a landed, high-class woman like Suellen. Atlanta’s
					aristocracy begins to reestablish its social network, using Melanie’s
					house as a meeting place. The physical rebuilding of Atlanta proceeds
					rapidly, as Scarlett’s success with the lumber mill illustrates.
					Postwar life is difficult, but it goes on—even matriarchs take on
					small business projects, and Confederate army veterans who were
					listless and despondent after the war begin working feverishly to
					rebuild their fortunes. Southerners remain almost defiant. Gerald’s
					death strikes a note of Southern pride and resolve, for he goes
					to his death hating the Yankees and defying them. The spirit of
					his defiance seems to echo throughout Georgia and the South during
					Reconstruction, as the Georgia legislature’s stubborn refusal to
					ratify the amendment granting citizenship to blacks demonstrates.

	Will Benteen emerges as the only poor white character
					whom Mitchell develops fully. He is a real person, not simply a
					sketch or a symbol. Other non-aristocratic characters, such as Emmie
					Slattery, the “white trash” character, and Jonas Wilkerson, the
					evil Yankee, never develop into anything more than stereotypes.
					Will, however, becomes a part of the O’Hara family and Scarlett’s
					trusted advisor. As a “cracker” (a lower-class white), Will has
					only a few slaves and little property before the war, a serious
					handicap to one’s status in a society that measures worth and class
					by the amount of land and slaves a man possesses. Before the war,
					the O’Haras would never have dreamed of socializing with Will, let
					alone allowing him to marry into their family. But with Tara in
					ruins, the O’Haras welcome Will’s help. He arrives at just the right
					moment to earn their respect and favor. Once Will gets his foot
					in the door, his good Southern manners win over the entire family
					and he successfully jumps class boundaries. With so many men killed
					in the war, the South must make class boundaries more permeable
					in order to survive. Still, class boundaries do not collapse completely:
					though Will advances in the Atlanta social scene, he does so not
					by his own merits but by marrying into an aristocratic family. Additionally,
					both Scarlett and the narrator exhibit a contemptuous attitude toward Emmie.
					Emmie’s family has next to nothing, and the South rejects her. Desirous
					of moving up in the world, Emmie must leave the South and join Northern
					society in order to improve her social lot.

	Scarlett’s decision to lease convicts illustrates the
					extent to which she has changed into a cutthroat businesswoman.
					Before the war, Scarlett would have been horrified, or at least
					would have feigned horror, at the mere mention of convicts. Now
					she hires them as workers. Everyone, even Archie, a convicted murderer,
					considers Scarlett’s decision inhumane. Convicts are not protected
					as free workers are, and they are treated badly by the people who
					lease them, sometimes dying from the abusive working conditions.
					Scarlett has never cared much about the consequences of her actions, thinking
					almost exclusively about how great a profit will result from them.
					She proceeds with the plan to hire convicts over the chorus of objections.
					Her ruthlessness reaches new heights during this difficult economic
					time, which suggests not only Scarlett’s inhumanity but also the
					general cruelty practiced by both Northerners and Southerners after
					the Civil War. Scarlett is predisposed to ruthlessness, but she
					is also a product of ruthless times.

