John Croft, a local attorney, tells Prejean they have
					to convince Robert to drop his stance that he is a political prisoner
					in preparation for his upcoming Pardon Board hearing. The Pardon
					Board is composed of the same individuals that heard Patrick’s case.
					Prejean notes that as political appointees, the board members cannot
					ignore the governor’s wishes. Joe Doss, an Episcopalian priest,
					told Prejean the board is not supposed to put “pressure on Governor
					Edwards.” John tells Prejean that Marion Farmer, the D.A. in Patrick’s
					case, had been criticized by his opponent for not seeking the death
					penalty in a previous case. He likely sought the death penalty for
					Patrick because of his own reelection campaign.

Prejean visits Robert, bringing him money for coffee and
					cigarettes. He gives her a copy of his presentation to the Pardon
					Board and reads it aloud without any emotion. He says he confessed
					without an attorney because his mother had been arrested for driving him
					and Vaccaro to Mississippi, that he is a political prisoner, and that
					he did not have a proper defense attorney. He apologizes for the death
					of Faith Hathaway at the end. Prejean tells him not to mention politics.
					He agrees to drop it but says he will not grovel for his life. He
					says his mother served six months in prison for helping him, and he’s
					not sure if he wants her at the hearing.

Prejean drives to the Pardon Board hearing with Marcia
					Blum, the attorney director of the Louisiana Capital Defense Project,
					and Liz Scott, a reporter writing an article on Robert and the Harveys. Prejean
					knows the board is going to approve the execution, which makes this
					hearing harder than Patrick’s was for her. Prejean and her friends
					sign in and sit on the defendant’s side of the room. Elizabeth, Robert’s
					mother, doesn’t know what she’s going to say. Prejean shakes hands
					with the Harveys.

D.A. Marion Farmer and Assistant D.A. William Alford,
					Jr., represent the state. John Croft, in his presentation, lists
					all of the flaws in Robert’s initial case. Elizabeth tries to testify
					but quickly breaks down and is escorted out. Robert reads what he
					has prepared. Prejean follows him. She talks about Patrick’s execution,
					her visit to the Harveys, and the racial and class bias of the death
					penalty. She calls on the board to take personal responsibility
					for the execution, and not to hide behind bureaucracy. Mr. Marsellus,
					the Board chairman, say they cannot be held responsible. Prejean
					asks him what would happen if they recommended life, rather than
					death, for every person that came before them.

Marion Farmer reviews the details of Faith Hathaway’s
					murder and says Robert is unrepentant. He says Robert has given
					up his right to live. Vernon and Elizabeth Harvey talk about Faith
					and about having to wait for justice. After twenty minutes of deliberation,
					the board unanimously votes for the sentence to remain. Robert naively
					believes he could have won had it not been for Mrs. Harvey’s speech.

Prejean describes talking with Howard Marsellus in September 1991,
					after he was released from prison for accepting bribes while working
					on the Pardon Board. He witnessed one execution while on the board,
					that of Tim Baldwin, a man of whose guilt he was never convinced.
					He voted against Baldwin because as a political appointee, he was
					expected to be a “team player” and to spare the governor the political
					burden of having to commute a sentence. Marsellus describes the
					corruption in the Pardon Board and explains that legislators also
					work as criminal attorneys and buy commuted sentences for their
					clients by agreeing to support the governor. As he describes Baldwin’s
					execution, he begins to cry. He asks, “Who was I to sit in judgment?”

Howard Marsellus’s remorse hammers home one of Prejean’s
					essential arguments against the death penalty. The state, she has
					argued, is not only fallible but often actively corrupt. Therefore,
					it cannot be trusted with the responsibility of deciding who lives
					and who dies. Camus’ assertion (i.e., if the condemned is considered
					absolutely evil, then the state that condemns him to death must
					be absolutely good) is especially appropriate in light of Howard
					Marsellus’s confession to Prejean. In addition to explaining the
					fraud and corruption that makes the Pardon Board system fallible,
					Marsellus recognizes the immense responsibility entrusted to the
					board, and to him specifically. The power to determine who should
					live and who should die was too great for him as an individual and
					for the entire system in which he worked.

During Robert’s Pardon Board hearing, Prejean challenges
					board members to consider their own actions, and the role they play
					as individuals in perpetuating the death penalty. Her challenge
					is answered at the end of the chapter with Marsellus’s apology.
					The man who once claimed that the members of the board were not responsible
					for the system is the man who, in the end, understands his role,
					accepts his responsibility, and apologizes. Throughout her narrative,
					Prejean has asserted the importance of individual responsibility.
					Marsellus’s startling admission of guilt and remorse is the first
					example of a government official acknowledging that responsibility.

Robert’s petition to the Pardon Board is a hopeless affair.
					What is striking is that the impossibility of saving Robert’s life
					makes his case all the more difficult. The motions to commute the
					death sentence feel just like that—motions performed for the sake
					of themselves. For Patrick, every moment and piece of information
					seemed to matter. For Robert, there is little to be said. There
					are no last-minute personal appeals to the governor, no religious
					leaders pleading on his behalf. The twenty minutes the Pardon Board
					spends deliberating seem mostly ceremonial.  Robert, with his carefully scripted,
					passionless testimony seems to know this all too well himself. His
					plea to spare his life is emotionless, and the D.A.’s argument is
					simple and direct.

