Eppie and Silas sit in their cottage later that evening.
					Silas has sent Dolly and Aaron Winthrop away, desiring solitude
					with his daughter after the excitement of the afternoon’s discovery.
					Silas muses about the return of his money and reconsiders the events
					that have passed since he lost it. He tells Eppie how he initially
					hoped she might somehow turn back into the gold, but later grew
					fearful of that that prospect because he loved her more than the
					money. Silas tells Eppie how much he loves her, and says the money
					has simply been “kept till it was wanted for you.” She responds
					that if not for Silas, she would have been sent to the workhouse.

	Someone knocks at the door, and Eppie opens it to find
					Godfrey and Nancy Cass. Godfrey tells Silas that he wants to make
					up to Silas not only for what Dunsey did, but also for another debt
					he owes to the weaver. Godfrey tells Silas that the money is not
					enough for him to live on without continuing to work. Silas, however, argues
					that though it might seem like a very small sum to a gentleman,
					it is more money than many other working people have. Godfrey says
					that Eppie does not look like she was born for a working life and
					that she would do better living in a place like his home. Silas becomes
					uneasy.

	Godfrey explains that since they have no children, they
					would like Eppie to come live with them as their daughter. He assumes
					that Silas would like to see Eppie in such an advantageous position,
					and promises that Silas will be provided for himself. Eppie sees
					that Silas is distressed, though Silas tells her to do as she chooses.
					Eppie tells Godfrey and Nancy that she does not want to leave her
					father, nor does she want to become a lady.

	Godfrey insists that he has a claim on Eppie and confesses
					that he is her father. Silas angrily retorts that, if this is the
					case, Godfrey should have claimed Eppie when she was a baby instead
					of waiting until Silas and Eppie had grown to love each other. Not
					expecting this resistance, Godfrey tells Silas that he is standing
					in the way of Eppie’s welfare. Silas says that he will not argue
					anymore and leaves the decision up to Eppie. As she listens, Nancy
					cannot help but sympathize with Silas and Eppie, but feels that
					it is only right that Eppie claim her birthright. Nancy feels that
					Eppie’s new life would be an unquestionably better one. Eppie, however,
					says that she would rather stay with Silas. Nancy tells her that
					it is her duty to go to her real father’s house, but Eppie responds
					that Silas is her real father. Godfrey, greatly discouraged, turns
					to leave, and Nancy says they will return another day.

Godfrey and Nancy return home and realize that Eppie’s
					decision is final. Godfrey concedes that what Silas has said is
					right, and he resigns himself simply to helping Eppie from afar.
					Godfrey and Nancy surmise that Eppie will marry Aaron, and Godfrey
					wistfully comments on how pretty and nice Eppie seemed. He says
					he noticed that Eppie took a dislike to him when he confessed that
					he was her father, and he decides that it must be his punishment
					in life to be disliked by his daughter. Godfrey tells Nancy that
					he is grateful, despite everything, to have been able to marry her,
					and vows to be satisfied with their marriage.

The next morning Silas tells Eppie that he wants to make
					a trip to his old home, Lantern Yard, to clear up his lingering
					questions about the theft and the drawing of the lots. After a few
					days’ journey, they find the old manufacturing town much changed
					and walk through it looking for the old chapel. The town is frightening
					and alien to them, with high buildings and narrow, dirty alleys.
					They finally reach the spot where the chapel used to be, and it
					is gone, having been replaced by a large factory. No one in the
					area knows what happened to the former residents of Lantern Yard.
					Silas realizes that Raveloe is his only home now, and upon his return
					tells Dolly that he will never know the answers to his questions.
					Dolly responds that it does not matter if his questions remain unanswered
					because that does not change the fact that he was in the right all
					along. Silas agrees, saying that he does not mind because he has
					Eppie now, and that gives him faith.

Eppie and Aaron are married on a beautiful summer day.
					Priscilla Lammeter and her father are among those who watch the
					procession through the village. They have come to keep Nancy company, as
					Godfrey has gone away for the day “for special reasons.” Priscilla tells
					her father that she wishes Nancy had found a child like Eppie to raise
					for her own. The procession stops at Mr. Macey’s porch, as he is
					too old and frail to attend the wedding feast and has prepared some
					kind words for Silas. At the Rainbow, the assembling guests talk
					about Silas’s strange story, and everyone, even the farrier, agrees that
					he deserves his good fortune. The wedding procession of Silas, Eppie,
					Aaron, and Dolly approaches the cottage. Eppie and Aaron have decided
					they would rather stay in Silas’s cottage than go to any new home,
					so the cottage has been altered to accommodate Aaron. Among other
					improvements, a large and impressive garden has been built at Godfrey’s
					expense. Returning home with the wedding party, Eppie tells Silas
					that she thinks “nobody could be happier than we are.”

The final intersection of the two narrative lines resolves
					the novel’s remaining tensions. The confrontation between Silas
					and the Casses over their claims to Eppie is partly a conflict of
					class. Despite their good intentions for Eppie’s welfare, Godfrey
					and Nancy do not understand the depth of Silas’s feelings for his
					daughter. Godfrey simply assumes that “deep affections can hardly
					go along with callous palms and scant means.” Though Nancy is more
					sympathetic to Silas’s bond with Eppie, she still regards the prospect
					of Eppie’s belatedly restored birthright as an “unquestionable good.”
					Also, Nancy’s “code” gives precedence to the claim of the blood
					father over the adoptive father. Against these claims, however,
					Silas and Eppie’s simple assertion of family easily wins out. The
					Casses’ assumptions of upper-class superiority and the importance
					of blood relations are no match for Silas’s simple emotion and moral
					certitude. Eliot here shows that Silas’s “rude mind,” which she
					describes with some condescension earlier in the novel, in fact
					possesses a great deal of natural nobility.

	While Godfrey’s attempt to make up for his past inaction
					is an important event, to some extent it has been predetermined
					by what has come before. As Silas says, after so many years, it
					is impossible for Godfrey to make up for his previous refusal to
					claim Eppie. Godfrey comes to understand that his wish to “pass
					for childless” when courting Nancy now means that he must continue
					to be childless, even though his wish has changed. Godfrey has no
					more managed to escape the consequences of his actions than Dunsey
					has. The sense of predetermination that haunts Godfrey is integral
					to the highly moral nature of Eliot’s narrative universe. Good deeds
					are ultimately rewarded, and evil deeds—or cowardly inaction—are
					punished.

	When Silas and Eppie visit Lantern Yard, they find that
					it is the opposite of Raveloe in more than one sense. Silas finds
					it a frightening and unrecognizable place. The chapel and graveyard
					have completely disappeared, and no one in the town remembers anything about
					the way things once were. Unlike Raveloe, where nothing ever goes
					away, in the larger town we see that people and places can disappear
					without a trace. The same thirty years that have utterly effaced
					Lantern Yard have brought virtually no comparable change to the
					landscape of Raveloe. The transitory nature of the larger town is
					partly a function of its size, but is also tied to industrialization.
					A factory, after all, replaces Lantern Yard’s chapel. The tall buildings
					that Silas and Eppie pass on their way through the town, with their
					“gloomy” doorways filled with “sallow, begrimed” faces, contrast
					with the rural, outdoorsy life of Raveloe. The industrial landscape
					of the larger town—frightening, destructive, and dehumanizing—has
					wiped out memory and history.


	Silas Marner closes with a final public
					event, bringing together all of its characters in the same way the
					Rainbow and the Squire’s dance do. However, whereas Silas is an
					intruder at the public gatherings earlier in the novel, this time
					he is at the center. Moreover, Godfrey, who was the beau of the
					New Year’s dance, chooses not to attend the wedding, making himself
					the outsider. Importantly, both Mr. Macey’s statement and the wedding
					guests’ conversations concern not the newlyweds but Silas himself.
					This provides yet another sign that Silas has completed his progression
					from the margins of the community to the center.





