This chapter marks the start of the second part of the
					novel, and the narrative voice switches from Rayona to Christine
					and from the present tense to the past. 

Christine’s narrative begins immediately after the time
					Christine expected the world to end. Christine regrets that she
					missed a party while getting ready for the apocalypse that never
					came and vows to never miss another party. Christine’s brother,
					Lee, is the best-looking boy on the reservation, but Christine does
					not consider herself attractive at all. She wonders if she and Lee
					have the same father, but Aunt Ida never tells them. Ida does not
					let Christine and Lee call her “mom” because she was never married.

	Lee hangs around with Christine throughout grade school. Christine
					is the toughest kid in her class, so the boys always send her out
					on dares, which she accepts every time. One day, however, they dare
					Christine to cross a natural bridge of stone that runs high over a
					stream. She is almost across when she freezes with fear, paralyzed until
					Lee comes and pulls her across. When the two walk down the ridge,
					Christine makes a mental list of things she should never again dare
					to do.

	When Christine is a sophomore and Lee is thirteen, a
					child of mixed heritage named Dayton Nickles moves to the reservation. Dayton
					becomes Lee’s shadow, following him everywhere. By this time, Christine
					is popular among her peers, and other girls in her class go to her
					when they want to learn about making out. One day, Christine is
					in her room and catches Dayton looking at her from the next room.
					Taking this look as a sign of Dayton’s interest, Christine becomes
					attracted to Dayton. During a powwow the next April, Christine takes
					Dayton out to a field and tries to seduce him. They begin kissing,
					but Dayton pulls away, telling Christine he thinks of her as a sister.
					Christine is furious. Dayton and Christine have a falling-out, and
					Lee is torn between them.

	Lee is an excellent rider and becomes a rodeo star. However, Aunt
					Ida refuses to allow Lee to make riding his profession. Christine
					can tell that Ida has other plans for Lee, but she does not know what
					they are. Some people claim that Lee will one day be regarded as
					the Indian JFK because he is so smart and handsome.

	After she graduates from high school Christine gets a
					job with the tribal council and constantly goes out with boys. One
					night Christine takes a road trip to North Dakota with Diamond,
					a young man who already has two children, and they stay there for
					two weeks. When Christine comes home, Ida is angry with her because
					Diamond’s mother has complained to Ida that Christine is preventing her
					from seeing her grandchildren. Christine moves out of Ida’s house
					and goes to live with Pauline, Ida’s sister.

	At the end of their high school careers, Lee and Dayton
					become active in the militant “Red Power” movement. Christine disapproves
					of Lee’s behavior and confronts him at a general store one day.
					Christine goes to Aunt Ida to tell her that Lee is acting strange, but
					Ida tells her that Lee is fine and knows what he is doing. Christine
					leaves the house, feeling forgotten.

This new section grows out of the story Christine is telling
					Rayona at the end of the previous chapter, and it is unclear whether
					she is telling the story out loud or if the novel has begun to chart
					Christine’s inner thoughts. Certainly, this section is more than
					just Christine telling a lengthy anecdote, and just as Rayona has
					done with her confession to Evelyn, Christine is now getting her
					own story out into the open. Unlike her daughter, however, Christine
					has the benefit of perspective, and this perspective is indicated
					by the fact that she uses the past tense (whereas Rayona uses the
					present tense). Christine, unlike Rayona, is distant enough from
					her story that she has to look back on it rather than narrate it
					as it occurs. 

	This chapter gives us a different perspective on the
					same reality we have been shown through Rayona’s eyes. Whereas Rayona always
					thinks of her mother as being attractive, we learn here that Christine
					never thought herself pretty. Because we have two equally subjective
					viewpoints, it is unclear whether Rayona’s admiration of her mother’s
					beauty is truly deserved or just another one of Rayona’s idealizations.
					Conversely, it is unclear whether Christine is correct in thinking
					she is unattractive or if this perspective merely reflects her low
					opinion of herself as a person.

	Christine begins her narrative by situating us in her
					era, the 1960s, and Dorris steeps the story
					in the culture of the 1960s to help us follow
					Christine’s story. Christine lingers on the idea of patriotism for
					the first few paragraphs, mentioning how important “respect for
					the red, white, and blue” was for people living on the reservation.
					Later, Christine mentions many of the popular songs of her day,
					which she hears on the radio program “The Teen Beat.” Because the
					songs she mentions are still familiar tunes, these references allow
					us to get some feel for the period. Christine also mentions some
					well-known political events and trends, all of which plant Christine’s
					story firmly in the 1960s without making
					it feel unfamiliar to a contemporary reader.

Another interesting aspect of the beginning of Christine’s
					story is the way it weaves into Rayona’s narrative and elaborates
					on some of the details Rayona leaves unexplained. People who are
					only minor characters in Rayona’s story, such as Lee and Dayton,
					are suddenly more prominent and are given more depth. The origins
					of several details Rayona mentions in passing are now fully explained,
					such as the notebook Rayona finds in Christine’s room in which Christine tries
					pairing her name with different boys’ last names. In this chapter
					we get to see the origin of attitudes and trends that are part of Christine’s
					life at the beginning of the novel. For example, Pauline’s warning
					to Christine that she will wear herself out echoes the warnings
					of Charlene, Christine’s friend from Seattle. Some of Christine’s behavior
					seems baffling at the beginning of the novel, but by showing the
					origins of some of her actions, Dorris brings us closer to understanding
					them.

