The narrator returns home disappointed at not having rounded
					up some useful tidbit of truth from her researches at the British
					Library. She turns at this point to history, which, she conjectures,
					"records not opinions but facts." As her starting point, she chooses
					to look into the lives of English women during the Elizabethan period—an era
					of surpassing literary accomplishment, but only among men. It is
					a virtue of Shakespeare's plays, she observes, that they seem, like enchanted
					spider-webs, "to hang there complete by themselves." In reality,
					however, even his works "are not spun in mid-air by incorporeal
					creatures, but are the real work of suffering human beings, and
					are attached to grossly material things, like health and money and
					the houses we live in."

History turns up little except a few terse statements
					about the legal rights of women in the early modern period (which
					were virtually non-existent). This reticence on the topic of women,
					and the fact of her utter powerlessness, strikes discordantly with
					the prevalence in literature of complex and strong female characters
					from ancient times to the present. "A very queer, composite being
					thus emerges. Imaginatively she is of the highest importance; practically she
					is completely insignificant. ...Some of the most inspired words, some
					of the most profound thoughts in literature fall from her lips; in
					real life she could hardly read, could scarcely spell, and was the property
					of her husband." In light of this paradox, the solution to the problem
					of trying to conceptualize the Elizabethan woman seems to be to
					pool the resources of history and fiction.

"It would have been impossible," the narrator concludes
					from this thought-experiment, "completely and entirely, for any
					woman to have written the plays of Shakespeare in the age of Shakespeare." To
					illustrate this conclusion, she conjures the imaginary character
					of Judith Shakespeare. Judith is as gifted perhaps as her brother,
					but receives no education except that which she can create for herself
					in what free time she has. Although she is "the apple of her father's eye,"
					her family expects her to conform to a social role that leaves no
					room for the development of her talent. She writes some, in secret,
					but hides or burns her work for fear of reprisal. She becomes engaged
					at a young age. When she begs to be allowed not to marry, she is
					chastised and beaten by her father. After this she runs away, driven
					by "the force of her own gift alone." She wants to go into acting,
					but meets with rejection and ridicule. She is finally taken up by a
					theater-manager, becomes pregnant by him, and commits suicide.

This is how the life of a woman with Shakespeare's genius
					might have looked at that time, the narrator argues. But she goes
					on to assert that "it is unthinkable that any woman in Shakespeare's
					day should have had Shakespeare's genius"- -or no more than the
					first germ of genius, and certainly not the kind that would ever
					have translated itself into brilliant writing. "For genius is not
					born among labouring, uneducated, servile people," except with the
					rarest exceptions—and even then, that social condition glares through as
					a limitation of the art. In that age, genius engendered witches
					and lunatics among women, and "Anonymous," she argues, was most likely
					a woman as well.

Having explored the deep inner conflicts that a gifted
					woman must have felt during the Renaissance, the narrator goes on
					to ask, "What is the state of mind that is most propitious to the
					act of creation?" She marvels at the "prodigious difficulty" of
					producing a work of genius, and observes that circumstances generally
					conspire against it. She cites as obstacles the indifference of
					most of the world, the profusion of distractions, and the heaping
					up of various forms of discouragement. This is true for all artists,
					but how much more so for women! A woman would not even have a room
					of her own, unless her parents were exceptionally wealthy, and in
					her spending money and discretionary time she would be totally at
					the mercy of others. Being regularly told of female ineptitude,
					women would surely have internalized that belief; the absence of
					any tradition of female intellectuals would have made such arguments
					all the more viable. Though we like to think of genius as transcendent,
					the narrator holds that the mind of the artist is actually particularly
					susceptible to discouragement and vulnerable to the opinion of others. The
					mind of the artist, she says, "must be incandescent. ...There must
					be no obstacle in it, no foreign matter unconsumed."

In this chapter, the narrator turns to history to look
					for "facts" about the relationship between women and literature.
					Relevant facts, however, prove to be few and far between. Once again,
					fiction is enlisted to help complete the history—and to expose,
					along the way, the biases and omissions of canonical knowledge.
					The absence of objective historical facts is a real obstacle for
					the person attempting to reconstruct the experience of 16th
					century women: "Here am I asking why women did not write poetry
					in the Elizabethan age, and I am not sure how they were educated;
					whether they were taught to write; whether they had sitting rooms
					to themselves; how many women had children before they were twenty-one;
					what, in short, they did from eight in the morning till eight at
					night." In spite of this gap in the historical record, however,
					the narrator provides an astute analysis of the conflicting values
					and impulses to which such a woman would have been susceptible.
					She points out that sexist assumptions would have been internalized,
					showing how oppression of this kind comes from within as well as
					from without. The touching portrait of Judith Shakespeare takes
					us beyond mere facts, touching the tragedy and anguish that would
					have been at the heart of an intelligent woman's experience at that
					time. Even while bemoaning the missing history, the author is aware
					that a purely objective view would not do justice to this subjective
					experience in the way the portrait of Judith Shakespeare might hope
					to. "Objectivity," in this instance, must take the form not of scientific
					detachment, but rather of imaginative engagement.

The narrator elaborates more fully the point from the
					first chapter that genius depends on certain conditions—and that
					these conditions, at the most basic level, are material and social.
					Because Shakespeare is so often sanctified as the pure genius who
					transcends all conditions of circumstance and surroundings, his
					era and his sister provide apt templates for Woolf's argument. There
					are two important ideas in play here. The first is that all art,
					even Shakespeare's, is in fact enabled by a historical,
					social, and economic reality, whether or not that reality finds
					articulation in the art itself. The different outcomes of William
					and Judith Shakespeare serve to dramatize this point, and also to
					account for the fact that women simply were not writing literature
					at that time. The second point is an aesthetic one: that good art
					in fact should not betray the personal circumstances
					surrounding its production. In order to achieve "incandescence,"
					the intensity of the art must burn away "all desire to protest,
					to preach, to proclaim an injury, to pay off a score, to make the
					world the witness of some hardship of grievance." It is in their
					incandescence that Shakespeare's plays achieve their greatness.
					But that characteristic is itself a luxury, and a product of social and
					material privilege (in much the same way that the narrator's five hundred
					pounds a year allows her to think about her controversial topic
					with charity and equanimity). The very fact that we know so little
					about Shakespeare as a person testifies to the greatness of his art.

