The title character, Silas is a solitary weaver who, at
				the time we meet him, is about thirty-nine years old and has been
				living in the English countryside village of Raveloe for fifteen
				years. Silas is reclusive and his neighbors in Raveloe regard him
				with a mixture of suspicion and curiosity. He spends all day working
				at his loom and has never made an effort to get to know any of the
				villagers. Silas’s physical appearance is odd: he is bent from his
				work at the loom, has strange and frightening eyes, and generally
				looks much older than his years. Because Silas has knowledge of
				medicinal herbs and is subject to occasional cataleptic fits, many
				of his neighbors speculate that he has otherworldly powers.

	Despite his antisocial behavior, however, Silas is at
				heart a deeply kind and honest person. At no point in the novel
				does Silas do or say anything remotely malicious and, strangely
				for a miser, he is not even particularly selfish. Silas’s love of
				money is merely the product of spiritual desolation, and his hidden
				capacity for love and sacrifice manifests itself when he takes in
				and raises Eppie.

	Silas’s outsider status makes him the focal point for
				the themes of community, religion, and family that Eliot explores
				in the novel. As an outcast who eventually becomes Raveloe’s most
				exemplary citizen, Silas serves as a study in the relationship between
				the individual and the community. His loss and subsequent rediscovery
				of faith demonstrate both the difficulty and the solace that religious
				belief can bring. Additionally, the unlikely domestic life that
				Silas creates with Eppie presents an unconventional but powerful
				portrait of family and the home.

	Though he is the title character of the novel, Silas
				is by and large passive, acted upon rather than acting on others.
				Almost all of the major events in the novel demonstrate this passivity.
				Silas is framed for theft in his old town and, instead of proclaiming
				his innocence, puts his trust in God to clear his name. Similarly,
				Dunsey’s theft of Silas’s gold and Eppie’s appearance on Silas’s
				doorstep—rather than any actions Silas takes of his own accord—are
				the major events that drive the narrative forward. Silas significantly
				diverges from this pattern of passivity when he decides to keep
				Eppie, thereby becoming an agent of his eventual salvation.

