The character of Stephen Dedalus is a harshly drawn version
				of Joyce himself at age twenty-two. Stephen first appeared as the
				main character of A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, which
				followed his development from early childhood to his proud and ambitious days
				before leaving Dublin for Paris and the realization of his artistic
				capabilities. When we meet Stephen again at the beginning of Ulysses, it
				is over two years after the end of Portrait. Stephen
				has been back in Dublin for over a year, having returned to sit
				at his mother’s deathbed. Stephen’s artistic talent is still unrealized—he
				is currently a reluctant teacher of history at a boy’s school. He
				is disappointed and moody and is still dressed in mourning over
				the death of his mother almost a year ago. Stephen’s interactions
				with various characters—Buck, Haines, Mr. Deasy—in the opening episodes
				of the book crystallize our sense of the damaging ties and obligations
				that have resulted from Stephen’s return to Ireland. At the beginning
				of Ulysses, Stephen is a self-conscious young man
				whose identity is still in formation. Stephen’s aloofness and his
				attempts to understand himself through fictional characters such
				as Hamlet dramatize his struggle to solidify this identity.

	Stephen is depicted as above most of the action of the
				novel. He exists mainly within his own world of ideas—his actions
				in the world tend to pointedly distance himself from others and
				from the world itself. His freeness with money is less a demonstration
				of his generosity than of his lack of material concerns. His unwashed
				state similarly reflects his removal from the material world. His
				cryptic stories and riddles cut o-thers off rather than include
				them. He stubbornly holds grudges, and our admiration of his noble
				struggle for independence is tempered by our knowledge of the impoverished siblings
				he has left behind. If Stephen himself is an unsympathetic character,
				however, the issues central to his identity struggle are easier
				for us to sympathize with. From his contemplation of the eye’s perception
				of the outside world to his teaching of a history lesson to his
				meditations on amor matris or “mother love,” Stephen’s
				mental meanderings center on the problem of whether, and how, to
				be an active or passive being within the world.

	Stephen’s struggles tend to center around his parents.
				His mother, who seems to blame Stephen for refusing to pray at her deathbed,
				represents not only a mother’s love but also the church and Ireland.
				Stephen is haunted by his mother’s memory and ghost in the same
				ways that he is haunted by memories of his early piety. Though Stephen’s
				father is still alive and well, we see Stephen attempting to ignore
				or deny him throughout all of Ulysses. Stephen’s
				struggle with his father seems to be about Stephen’s need to have
				a space in which to create—a space untainted by Simon Dedalus’s
				overly critical judgments. Stephen’s struggle to define his identity
				without the constraint or aid imposed by his father bleeds into larger
				conflicts—Stephen’s struggle with the authority of God, the authority
				of the British empire, even with the authority of the mocker or
				joker.

	After the first three episodes, Stephen’s appearances
				in Ulysses are limited. However, these limited
				appearances—in Episodes Nine, Fourteen, and Fifteen—demonstrate
				that Stephen’s attempted repudiation of authority and obligations
				has precipitated what seems to him to be the abandonment of all
				those close to him. At the end of Episode Fifteen, Stephen lies
				nearly unconscious on the ground, feeling as though he has been
				“betrayed” by everyone. Never before has Stephen seemed so much
				in need of a parent, and it is Bloom—not wholly father nor mother—who
				cares for him.

	Though Stephen plays a part in the final episodes of Ulysses, we see
				less and less of his thoughts as the novel progresses (and, perhaps not
				coincidentally, Stephen becomes drunker and drunker). Instead, the
				circumstances of the novel and the apparent choices that Stephen
				makes take over our sense of his character. By the novel’s end,
				we see that Stephen recognizes a break with Buck Mulligan, will
				quit his job at Deasy’s school, and has accepted, if only temporarily,
				Bloom’s hospitality. In Bloom’s kitchen, Stephen puts something
				in his mouth besides alcohol for the first time since Episode One,
				and has a conversation with Bloom, as opposed to performing as he
				did earlier in the day. We are thus encouraged to understand that,
				in the calm of the late-night hours, Stephen has recognized the power
				of a reciprocal relationship to provide sustenance.




