A poet, swordsman, scientist, playwright, musician, and member of the Cadets of Gascoyne, a company of guards from Southern France. For all his prodigious talents, Cyrano is unattractive, cursed with a ridiculously long nose that makes him insecure and keeps him from revealing his love for his cousin Roxane.

Read in-depth analysis of Cyrano de Bergerac.

Cyrano’s cousin, a beautiful and intellectual heiress. She has a soft spot for romance and a love for poetry and wit.

Read in-depth analysis of Roxane.

Perhaps the opposite of Cyrano, Christian a handsome but simple young nobleman who lacks wit and intelligence. New to Paris and to the cadets, he falls in love with Roxane and joins Cyrano’s company of cadets early in the play. His good looks are matched only by Roxane’s.

Read in-depth analysis of Baron Christian de Neuvillette.

A powerful, married nobleman in love with Roxane and not fond of Cyrano. Deceitful and always angry, he attempts several times to have Cyrano killed, once by a hundred men.

Read in-depth analysis of Comte de Guiche.

Cyrano’s friend, a pastry chef with a deep love for poetry. Ragueneau gives away pastries in return for poems, and, therefore, innumerable poets visit him frequently. He reflects the theme that poetry is food for the soul, and underlines the division between the physical and spiritual aspects of the world. After his business fails, he becomes Roxane’s porter.

Cyrano’s friend and closest confidant. He is a fellow soldier and guardsman. Le Bret worries that Cyrano’s principles will ruin his career, but Cyrano ignores Le Bret’s concerns.

Christian’s friend, a satirist and drunkard with many powerful enemies. Cyrano protects him from the hundred men hired by de Guiche to ambush him.

Roxane’s companion and chaperone,who tries to keep Roxane out of trouble. She is a character reminiscent of Juliet’s nurse in Romeo and Juliet.

An insolent young nobleman lauded by de Guiche as a possible husband for Roxane, a scheme that would give de Guiche access to Roxane. After he insults Cyrano’s nose, he is defeated in an ensuing duel.

A fat, untalented actor whom Cyrano bans from the stage.

Cyrano’s friend and the captain of his company. He is a strong-willed and successful leader.

The man in charge of the theater at the Hotel de Bourgogne.

Ragueneau’s sharp-tongued wife. She does not approve of her husband’s patronage of the local poets. An altogether unhappy woman, she leaves Ragueneau for a musketeer after Act II.

A modest and well-meaning monk. De Guiche employs him to carry a message to Roxane. He is diverted at first by Cyrano when they are outside Roxane’s residence. He later presides over Roxane and Christian’s hasty wedding.

Nuns of Roxane’s convent. They are compassionate women who admire and respect Cyrano and therefore allow him to visit whenever he wishes.

Not a character, but a historical figure referenced in the play as de Guiche’s uncle. Perhaps the most powerful man in France, he is a skilled political manipulator whose authority rivals and probably exceeds that of the king.

