Margot and Mr. and Mrs. Frank cannot get used to the chiming
					of the clock in the annex, but Anne feels reassured by it. She tells
					her diary that living in the annex is similar to being on vacation
					in a strange boarding house, and she thinks that the annex is probably the
					most comfortable hiding place in all of Holland. Anne’s father had
					brought her movie posters to the attic in advance, so she plasters her
					bedroom walls with them. Anne looks forward to the arrival of the
					van Daans, the other family who will live with them in the annex.
					In a comment added to this section several months later, however,
					Anne expresses how upset she is about not being able to go outside
					and that she is terrified that they will be discovered and shot.

	Anne begins to argue with her mother more frequently.
					She feels that she does not fit in with her mother or sister, who
					are both very sentimental. Anne thinks that her father is the only
					one who understands her. She knows that she will not be able to
					leave the annex until after the war and that only a few people will
					be able to visit them. However, she is still hopeful and dreams
					of many things.

	The van Daan family arrives on July 13, 1942.
					They come one day ahead of schedule because German call-up notices
					are being sent out with increasing frequency and causing unrest.
					Mr. van Daan explains what happened after the Franks’ disappearance.
					The Franks had deliberately spread false rumors to throw the Gestapo off
					their trail, so most of their friends think they went to Switzerland.

	Mr. Voskuijl, the father of one of Mr. Frank’s coworkers,
					builds a bookcase in front of the door to the annex to conceal it.
					Anne’s mother and Mrs. van Daan argue a lot, and Peter van Daan
					annoys the Franks with his hypochondria. Anne adds that Mrs. van
					Daan and her mother both speak abominable Dutch but that she will properly
					transcribe it in her diary. Anne is also studying French and memorizes
					five irregular verbs each day. She complains that Mrs. van Daan
					criticizes her even though Anne is not her daughter.

	Anne and the others in the annex must take turns using
					the hot water to take baths, and when the plumber visits the building,
					they must sit completely still. Every time the doorbell rings, Anne
					is terrified because she thinks it is the Gestapo. Later, Anne imagines
					that she is in Switzerland and has 150 guilders
					to spend. She hears only bad news about the fates of the Franks’
					many Jewish friends and begins to tackle the issue of her identity,
					since she is both a German and a Jew.

At first, Anne sees her new life in hiding as an adventure
					of sorts. Though the two families live in constant fear of capture,
					they spend their time thinking about simpler, more immediate problems.
					They often try to think of ways to escape boredom. Because they
					are in such close quarters, the residents begin to get annoyed with
					one another’s quirks. Peter is a hypochondriac, Mrs. van Daan is
					critical, and Anne’s mother and Peter’s mother fight a lot and speak improper
					Dutch. At first Anne focuses on figuring out ways to avoid getting
					frustrated with the others or ways to stay quiet while the plumber
					is visiting. Anne’s initial pleasure with the novelty of the annex
					quickly fades, as she becomes restless and frustrated at her inability
					to go outside or even open the curtains during daylight hours. Even
					Anne’s pervasive optimism cannot keep her from feeling dread each
					time the doorbell rings. The mundane routines of daily life are
					not quite able to mask the constant ring of terror and fear in the
					annex.

	The war causes Anne to struggle with her identity as
					both a German and a Jew. She initially identifies herself with the
					Germans, writing, “Fine specimens of humanity . . . and to think
					I’m actually one of them!” However, she immediately refutes her
					own statement, writing “No, that’s not true, Hitler took away our
					nationality long ago. And besides, there are no greater enemies
					on earth than the Germans and the Jews.” Anne’s words demonstrate
					her contempt for the Nazis and her confusion at the fact that they
					are in fact fellow Germans. Anne feels a stronger connection to
					the Dutch, but her first instinct is to identify herself as German.
					She quickly rethinks this notion, realizing that the Nazis no longer
					consider Jews to be Germans.

The adults in the annex likely share Anne’s confusion
					about their national and ethnic identity. Having lived in Germany
					for most of their lives, the Frank and the Van Daan adults have
					significant roots there. Thirty years earlier, Anne’s father and
					other German Jews had fought for the German army in World War I.
					Likewise, in the Netherlands, Dutch Jews and non-Jews lived side
					by side, considering themselves members of a unified and integrated
					community. However, the Nazi regime’s rise to power brought the
					painful realization that both Nazis and many other German people
					considered Jews foreign or different. As we see in Anne’s identity
					crisis, the Nazi regime killed not only Jewish people but also the
					Jewish community’s collective connection to its past. While the
					Nazis forced Jews to wear stars to mark their identity, they simultaneous
					stripped the Jews of their identity as members of society.

	Anne’s diary demonstrates the impact the Holocaust has
					on a single girl, which personalizes this sprawling historical horror.
					Anne becomes preoccupied with questions about who she is and whom she
					wants to become, and her once innocent perspective changes considerably.
					The Holocaust forces Anne to grow up and come to terms with her
					own identity—her role as a member of her family, as a Jew, and as
					a young woman in a dangerous, threatening world.

