Yolanda stood in the window of a mental institution, watching
					a man with a tennis racket. Yolanda named the objects in her room and
					described her relationship with John, her husband, to her doctor.
					She imagined them flirting on a riverbank amid the constellations,
					saying, "I love you." She remembered when they played word game
					while relaxing next to a pond. Yolanda insisted that John was a
					pond and she was the sky. John pointed out that her nickname Yo does
					not rhyme with the word sky. But she pointed out that Yo, pronounced
					Joe, rhymes with cielo, which means sky in Spanish.

She began to mistrust John when he said she was crazy
					and needed a shrink. She also distrusted that he made lists of the
					pros and cons of marrying her. She was hurt that he thought she
					was too intelligent for her own good and might be crazy. She got
					angry when he tried to kiss her and screamed, "No!" She also got
					upset when he tried to make love to her. When he brought her irises,
					she could not understand what he said anymore. When he spoke, she
					only heard, "Babble babble." She had trouble writing a good-bye
					note, but finally left to go to her parents' house.

With her parents, she spoke only in quotations or misquotations of
					literature she had read or songs she had heard. Her therapist, Dr. Payne,
					suggested that she check into a mental hospital and her parents
					agreed. Yolanda cried as she was taken to the hospital, but she decided
					that Dr. Payne would help her get better. She also thought she was
					falling in love with him. When her parents visited, she awkwardly
					told them she loved them, and that she and John just did not speak
					the same language. She thought her nicknames fragmented her sense
					of self. She also felt allergic to certain words like love or alive,
					and had physical reactions when she said or heard them.

While she watched Dr. Payne carrying his tennis racket,
					she felt something coming up out of her throat. It was a big black
					bird, which perched on her bureau and reminded her of Edgar Allen
					Poe's raven. She watched the bird fly through the window screen
					like smoke and then attack Dr. Payne. She screamed as the bird's
					beak and claws tore at his chest. The bird flew away and blended
					into dark clouds in the distance. She then saw that what she thought
					was blood was just a red towel Dr. Payne was holding.

Yolanda then repeated the word love and her own name,
					hoping to overcome her allergy and be able to use words again the
					way she used to. She searched for words to describe the sky, and
					then words that rhymed with those words. As she used more words
					she regained some faith in the power of words to describe the world.

Yolanda's descent into madness and her inability to communicate with
					other people, especially the ones she loves the most, reflects the dissolution
					of her sense of self. Yolanda used to define herself as a poet,
					and a person for whom words had a particular and very important
					significance. Her inability to understand the words that John spoke
					represents their problems communicating on a personal level. This
					gap between what he said and what she understood led to the breakdown
					of their marriage. This communication problem is symbolized through
					the transformation of language into meaningless and garbled babble.

The destruction of the meaning behind language represents Yolanda's
					inability to connect with other people in meaningful ways. Her failure
					to relate to John on deeper interpersonal levels is rooted in her
					distrust of his love, and his difficulty understanding her Dominican
					culture and heritage. Her cultural identity is represented by the
					Spanish language, which John cannot understand. When Yolanda points
					out that her name rhymes with sky in Spanish, she highlights the
					fact that he cannot access or appreciate her first language and
					her deeper cultural connections to the Dominican Republic.

The fragmented narration of this chapter reflects both
					Yolanda's disjointed thought processes related to her mental breakdown,
					as well as her fragmented sense of identity. Her national and cultural identity
					is split between the Dominican Republic and the United States, and
					her personal sense of self is also fragmented. This fragmented sense
					of self was brought on by the heartbreak of divorce, yet also indicates
					ongoing problems relating to other people. The bastardization of
					her name from Yolanda to Yo to Yoyo to Joe to Josephine throughout
					her relationships with John and her family members represents the
					dissolution of Yolanda's sense of identity. Her later insistence
					on being called only Yolanda reflects her desire to heal by integrating
					her various emotional and psychological parts.

The raven that emerges from her throat and attacks Dr.
					Payne represents her fears that language, and specifically her own
					words, could hurt the people she cares about. Her affection and
					attraction to Dr. Payne is threatened by the aggressive and ugly
					words that could come out of her mouth, symbolized by the bird.
					The bird freely moves from the room through the window screen, just
					as Yolanda might be able to freely speak her own mind if she were
					able to stop misquoting others. The allergy that she develops to
					certain emotionally charged words like love also symbolizes her
					fear of the damage she could do to those she cares about should
					she use language to convey her feelings.

