Campbell questions Brian on the stand, confident that Brian will help him win
					the case by disagreeing with Sara’s position. Brian admits there have been times
					he’s disagreed with Sara, such as the time they needed Anna to donate lymphocytes.
					However, he says that while he doesn’t want to hurt Anna, he can’t lose Kate, and
					that when your child is dying you do not always have a choice. He notes that he
					disagreed with Sara’s decision to start Kate on arsenic therapy, but that Kate ended
					up surviving. Although he hates to see Kate suffer, he says he doesn’t want to make
					the same mistake twice and agrees with Sara’s wish to have Anna continue as a donor.
					Campbell feels stunned by Brian’s reversal. Brian acknowledges he doesn’t know—and
					has never known—the right answer, and begins to cry.

During a recess, Anna wonders whether she made Brian fall apart. She says she
					had never seen him cry before. Campbell tells her she will need to testify if they
					want to win. Anna declines, despite Campbell’s insistence that they will lose. She
					yells at Campbell that he needs to find another way to win the case. Campbell
					assures Anna that, this time, when she speaks people will listen. Anna refuses, but
					when Campbell asks why, she won’t say.

For the first time, Sara narrates in the present. She prepares to question
					Brian and notices all of the qualities that made her fall in love with him. She also
					notices how much he has changed but doesn’t necessarily for the worse. She begins
					questioning him but finds herself talking about a family trip they took. Suddenly
					Sara realizes they are no longer pushing each other away but are fighting on the
					same side. She feels like none of the past arguments matter. She thinks that they
					will have each other to remember what their family used to be like, to share the
					fact that they had Kate for sixteen years. Sara decides she doesn’t need to
					cross-examine Brian. She simply asks when he is coming home.

Brian and Anna move back home that night. After Brian and Sara tuck Anna in,
					Sara tells Anna she is not a bad person because she wants to be herself. She also
					says Anna reminds her of herself. Later that night, Brian and Sara make love.
					Afterward, Sara tells Brian that they are going to lose her, and she doesn’t know
					which daughter she is talking about.

Brian, who until now has acted as Anna’s main ally in the family and whom
					Campbell counted on to be the lynchpin of his case, makes a dramatic reversal of
					course in this section. Despite saying he would testify that Anna should not have to
					give Kate her kidney, Brian says on the stand that he still wants Anna to go through
					with the donation. Though Brian doesn’t give a reason for his change of heart, he
					hints at a possible reason earlier in his testimony when he says he couldn’t let
					Kate die. Brian may want to side with Anna, but perhaps the possibility of Kate
					dying seems more real than it previously had. Even as Brian states this opinion,
					however, he clearly feels conflicted about the matter. His voice full of emotion, he
					says he has considered what is right and wrong in this situation and he cannot come
					to a definite conclusion. He then breaks down and begins to cry. Brian’s statement
					again raises the theme that no clear line divides right from wrong, and this
					ambiguity has taken a considerable emotional toll on Brian and several of the other
					characters in the story.

Anna’s refusal to take the stand raises its own set of questions. Up until
					this point, Anna has said that she brought the lawsuit because she wants to finally
					have a voice and to be the one who decides what happens to her body. She resents the
					fact that nobody has ever asked whether she wants to be Kate’s donor. Now that Anna
					has the opportunity to state her opinion publicly, however, she backs down. Instead,
					she tells Campbell, another adult, to speak on her behalf. Anna’s behavior appears
					to contradict what she says she wants. Her words to Campbell indicate that something
					more than simple shyness drives her refusal to testify. She tells him that there are
					just some things she doesn’t want to talk about, though she won’t elaborate. She
					evidently wants to keep her reasons secret.

The epigraph that begins the chapter comes from Shakespeare’s “King Henry VI,”
					and it refers to the fact that a small fire, though easily put out, can cause
					lasting pain that an entire river can’t alleviate. In the context of the novel, the
					quotation appears to refer to the fact that even though the trial is near its
					conclusion and Brian has testified that he agrees with Sara’s position (mending the
					rift that had grown between them), the Fitzgerald family will still have to deal
					with the aftermath of the trial and Kate’s cancer. The problems caused by the
					lawsuit may be nearing their end, but the pain it has caused will linger
					on.

