A thoughtful and kind Methodist pastor, Mr. Tanimoto works
				endlessly to help bring many of the nameless dying and wounded to safety.
				He is unhurt by the bomb and feels ashamed to be healthy while surrounded
				by so much human misery; so he spends more time and energy than
				any other character helping the wounded. He is later affected by
				radiation sickness and he loses much of his vitality and energy.
				After the war, he travels to America to give speeches and raise
				money for a peace center in Japan. He lavishes praise on the American
				people and government, calling them generous and “the greatest civilization
				in human history.” His newfound popularity ends up backfiring, as
				many in both Japan and America consider him a publicity seeker.
				Ironically, because of all the time he spends in the U.S., he ends
				up missing out on the development of a grassroots Japanese peace
				movement in which he does not get to play any part.

	Of the six people profiled in Hiroshima, Mr.
				Tanimoto comes across as the most complex and difficult to understand.
				With his dedicated hard work in the days after the bombing, he seems
				to embody the personal humility and group-consciousness characteristic
				of Japanese culture. Yet at the same time, his actions seem very self-conscious
				because he, of all the characters, feels the strongest ties to America,
				ties that he knows cause suspicion. The pressure he feels to prove
				his loyalty to Japan reveals an important cultural dynamic at the
				time: Japanese citizens with foreign ties were even more suspect
				than actual foreigners such as Father Kleinsorge. As a Japanese
				man with ties to America, Mr. Tanimoto feels a constant guilt and
				drive to prove his loyalty. Despite all his hard work, however,
				Mr. Tanimoto fails to achieve the respect he craves from the Japanese,
				and his sycophantic praise of the Americans not only seems insincere,
				but also causes governmental suspicion.

	Of all the characters, Mr. Tanimoto undergoes the most
				drastic postwar lifestyle changes, constantly traveling around the
				U.S., appearing on television, and trying to start his peace center.
				Hersey spends more time writing about him than about anyone else,
				and he ends the narrative with a description of an aging Mr. Tanimoto
				in his comfortable, modern home. Mr. Tanimoto’s life could serve
				as a twentieth-century political allegory of what happens when good intentions
				are coupled with miscalculated methods and an exaggerated need to
				please.

