When Quintana wakes from her coma in January of 2004,
					Didion tells her that her father has died. Quintana seems to understand,
					but later that night she asks after her father again. Quintana does
					not manage to absorb the news until months later, when she is again
					in an ICU, this time in Los Angeles.

Soon after Quintana wakes up, she is discharged from Beth
					Israel and taken to Didion’s apartment to recuperate. The next morning, she
					awakes with chest pain and a fever and is taken to Columbia Presbyterian,
					where she is diagnosed with a pulmonary embolism, a condition that
					should have been foreseen by her doctors at Beth Israel. Placed
					on anticoagulants, she is discharged again several days later. Quintana
					helps her mother plan John’s funeral service. On the night of the
					funeral, the family gathers in Didion’s apartment, and though Quintana
					is still fragile, she stands up at the service and enjoys visiting
					with her cousins at dinner. Several days later, Quintana tells Didion
					that she and her husband Gerry are flying to Malibu to restart their
					life, a plan that Didion encourages.

Didion must figure out how to restart her own life, now
					that her daughter is better and the funeral is over. The day of
					Quintana’s trip, Didion imagines Quintana and Gerry arriving in
					Los Angeles and wandering along the beach in Malibu. Quintana would
					be able to take Gerry to her favorite restaurants and childhood
					haunts. While preparing to go to dinner that evening, Didion receives
					a call from Tony, telling her that he is coming over to the apartment.
					Didion assumes that something has happened to Tony’s wife Rosemary, who
					has been in ill health, but Tony says that Quintana is undergoing
					emergency neurosurgery at UCLA Medical Center. While crossing the
					street to the rental car shuttle at LAX, Didion learns, Gerry had
					looked back and had seen Quintana lying on the asphalt. An ambulance
					had been called and Quintana was taken to UCLA. Upon arriving at
					the emergency room, she had lost coherence and had begun convulsing.
					A CT scan was performed, and by the time they brought her in for
					surgery her pupils were fixed and dilated. The CT scan indicated
					a subdural hematoma, a traumatic brain injury in which hemorrhaged
					blood puts pressure on sensitive brain tissue. Quintana had seemingly
					recovered from a life-threatening situation but now was at greater
					risk than ever before.

Tony arrives at the apartment and they call Gerry into
					the ER, where Quintana’s prognosis has upgraded to the point that
					the surgeons believe she will leave the operating table. Didion
					attempts to plan a flight to Los Angeles until Tony tells her that
					being in flight during Quintana’s surgery would be a bad idea. Instead,
					Didion contacts two friends in Los Angeles, who go to the hospital
					to wait with Gerry. She then calls a friend to ask if she can use
					his house in L.A., and he offers a seat on a private plane he’s
					taking there the next day. At midnight, Gerry calls to report that
					the surgery is over and Quintana is undergoing another CT scan.
					At 4
a.m., he calls
					again to say the CT scan is clean and a screen has been placed in
					her heart to prevent clots. The next morning, before leaving to
					catch the plane, Didion looks up “fixed and dilated pupils” (or
					FDPs) and learns the chilling fact that few patients survive after
					having FDPs, and the majority of those that do become vegetative
					or brain-dead.

Didion’s hopes for personal recovery are disrupted by
					Quintana’s collapse and rehospitalization, which shatters the opportunity
					for healing. The grief process is typically structured along a process
					of improvement, and the various stages of recovery have become ingrained
					into our cultural consciousness. Didion is no different in her expectations
					that, after facing the greatest personal trial of her life, things
					will eventually start to improve. Didion vividly imagines this for
					Quintana as well, taking comfort in an idyllic fantasy of her daughter
					recuperating on a warm beach in Malibu. Though the news that Quintana
					is at greater risk than ever before feels shocking and emotionally
					devastating in its own right, the disruption of her own narrative
					of progress and improvement heightens its intensity. It also opens
					up another opportunity for magical thinking. Didion has to believe
					that Quintana is getting better, because after John’s death something
					good has to happen. Quintana’s subdural hematoma seems to betray
					the pattern of recovery Didion expects her life to follow and adds
					a level of disruption and shock that changes the direction of the
					rest of the memoir.

Once again, Didion depicts her shock at the news formally,
					pulling herself and her personal feelings out of her description
					of events to emphasize that she felt anesthetized and emotionally
					withdrawn. Once again, Didion becomes a “pretty cool customer,”
					listening and absorbing the new information without describing her
					emotional response. While the previous chapters began to open up
					to analysis and self-examination, Didion’s narrative voice shuts
					down emotionally and is stripped down to a stark, detached style
					of reporting that lays out the events simply and evenhandedly. The
					tonal shift mirrors the evolution of Didion’s grieving process.
					While John’s death had been a crippling and painful blow, during
					Quintana’s recovery she had begun to see possible opportunities
					for healing. Quintana’s health became her focus, and her daughter’s
					steady improvement seemed to suggest that Didion too could recover.
					Didion suddenly has to face the fact that, after losing her husband,
					she now faces the possibility of losing her daughter. Plunged into
					a state in which healing and recovery seem impossibly far away,
					Didion ceases to include the thoughtful self-analysis or emotionally informed
					exposition that had begun to emerge in preceding chapters. In the
					chapters where Didion feels the most, she is the least present as
					a character.

Didion draws parallels between John’s death and Quintana’s
					collapse, which underscores the suddenness of both events and the degree
					to which they leave confusion in their wake, taking the illusion
					of agency completely out of Didion’s hands. Both collapses occur
					in the middle of a moment of action and set off a chain reaction
					of institutionalized responses. Both Didion and Gerry are powerless
					observers who must listen to, process, and disseminate information
					to the necessary people. After John’s death, Didion had been able
					to take steps toward gaining more agency over her situation, following
					the expected procedures of planning a funeral, conducting research,
					and going through a process of self-examination. Though the resulting
					agency was limited, Didion was still able to take some measure of
					control in a situation in which she was powerless. Once again, the
					rug has been pulled out from underneath her, putting her back into
					a position where she is a helpless observer. Didion uses the parallels
					to emphasize how suddenly her husband and daughter had collapsed,
					but also to emphasize how, even after she attempts to regain some
					stability in her life, she finds herself subject to a catastrophic
					situation entirely outside of her control.

