“Sometimes you’re the windshield: sometimes
						you’re the bug.”

Carmen sees Krista having trouble with her summer geometry homework,
					but when Albert asks if she’s ready to go play tennis, Carmen leaves
					happily without offering to help. She writes to Bridget about Paul’s
					girlfriend, whom she calls “Skeletor.” She says Paul hates her because
					she tries to make Skeletor jealous.

Bailey comes to Wallman’s, and she and Tibby banter about Tibby’s
					smock. Tibby reluctantly agrees when Bailey asks if she wants to
					go out for ice cream later. However, she finds a lot to talk about
					with Bailey, who enjoys hearing about the documentary. Tibby spots
					Tucker Rowe, whom she’s been avoiding all summer. Bailey makes fun
					of his gelled hair.

Bridget proposes to her friends that they go to a bar
					in a nearby town where all the coaches hang out, and Diana, Ollie,
					and Rosie agree. There, Bridget begins dancing immediately. She
					finally sees Eric and knows he’s watching her. Eventually, Eric
					and the other coaches dance too. Bridget dances with Eric, who gives
					in to it only briefly before telling her they can’t be so close.

Lena is alone in her room when she hears her grandfather
					yelling. She rushes downstairs and follows her grandparents, who
					storm to Kostos’s house. She can’t understand what her grandfather
					and Kostos’s grandfather are yelling. Suddenly, Lena’s grandfather
					punches Kostos’s grandfather, and the men begin tussling. Kostos
					breaks up the fight.

Bridget writes to her father, asking him to send some
					of her nice clothes.

“If you feel like you’re under control,
						you’re just not going fast enough.”

Carmen and Albert talk about the upcoming wedding on their
					way to the tennis court. He says that Lydia wants it to be perfect,
					since her mother died six weeks before her first wedding, and she’d
					been married in city hall. He tells Carmen that Lydia’s first husband
					was an alcoholic. Carmen feels sorry for Lydia, Paul, and Krista
					and vows to be nicer. But when her dad asks if they can watch Paul
					play soccer before heading to the tennis court, Carmen feels unhappy again.

Bridget goes swimming early in the morning, unable to
					sleep, and she thinks about dancing with Eric. During the day’s
					scrimmage, Bridget focuses on looking good for Eric. She shows off
					by hogging the ball, which angers her coach, Molly. Bridget doesn’t
					know why she can’t slow herself down sometimes.

Carmen writes to Tibby about Lydia’s elaborate wedding
					preparations and how no one in the family talks about anything else.

Carmen and Albert watch Paul play soccer. Albert is obviously proud
					of Paul, who’s an excellent player, which makes Carmen jealous.
					Lydia unexpectedly shows up, frantic because their reception hall
					has overbooked and she has to find a new place. Albert apologizes
					to Carmen and cancels the tennis game. He tells her that Paul will
					drive her home. After the game, Paul asks her if she wants to play
					tennis, and she beats him twice.

Lena does her best to keep to herself and stay out of
					the spotlight, but the more she tries to hide from Kostos, the more
					entangled with him she becomes. Lena goes out of her way to avoid
					Kostos, walking in the opposite direction on purpose, avoiding conversation
					with him, and acting cool toward him when they’re forced to interact, despite
					her interest in the things he has to say. She also spends a great deal
					of time just on her own, walking or painting and not talking to anyone.
					Even her breakfasts with her grandfather are spent in silence, both
					of them in their own worlds. Lena’s most isolated moment occurs
					at the pond, when she feels so solitary and safe that she goes skinny-dipping.
					However, this blissful moment leads to her most dramatic encounter
					with Kostos, when he violates her privacy and sees her naked. Lena,
					who has tried her best to avoid awkward encounters and even unnecessary
					interaction, is now at the center of a two-family drama that drives
					two elderly grandfathers to blows. Lena’s self-consciousness and
					silence lead to great confusion, but even in the midst of this severe
					misunderstanding, she is incapable of speaking up, capturing attention,
					and clearing up the mess. She silences herself, which leads to further
					problems and misunderstandings.

Bridget is extroverted and fun-loving, but she can also
					be reckless, putting herself in physical and emotional danger. Bridget
					is unafraid to take chances. She is the one always suggesting to
					her friends at camp that they do things just outside the scope of
					the rules, such as sleeping outside on the beach and riding their
					bikes to a local bar. She swims alone at dawn, far out into the
					ocean, unafraid. She pursues Eric even though relationships between coaches
					and campers are forbidden, and she seems to fall for him hard even
					though she hardly knows him. She allows him to be her motivation
					for playing soccer well, and he dominates her mind. Bridget seems
					to crave excitement, danger, and risk, and she is never content
					to sit back and wait for things to happen. Instead, she is always
					charging ahead, looking for the next opportunity to garner attention
					or pursue what she wants. She rarely stops to think about her actions.
					When she does slow down for a moment, such as when her coach takes
					her out of the game for playing too aggressively, she is uncomfortable
					with her behavior, and also confused by it, as though even Bridget
					herself isn’t sure sometimes why she does the things she does.

Both Tibby and Carmen struggle to reconcile feelings of
					pity with feelings of annoyance and anger. Tibby is annoyed by Bailey,
					who seems intent on making the two become friends, and Tibby is embarrassed
					to hang out with a kid so much younger than she is. Bailey is also
					direct to the point of being rude, which is irritating to Tibby
					but also kind of fun, since she can hold her own when it comes to
					witty banter. However, Tibby also pities Bailey because she has cancer,
					and so she tries to quell her annoyance and irritation and be nice.
					Tibby would probably not hesitate to avoid or ignore another assertive
					kid, but she feels tied to Bailey because of the cancer, as though
					the cancer obligates Tibby to become Bailey’s friend. Carmen struggles
					with pity as well, feeling a new kindness toward Lydia, Krista,
					and Paul after she finds out Lydia’s ex-husband was an alcoholic.
					Although Carmen is annoyed by Lydia’s excessive wedding planning,
					this new information makes her feel more understanding, if only
					temporarily. Carmen doesn’t want to pity this new family, since
					her feelings of anger are firmly in place. However, as Carmen learns
					more about Lydia, and as she recognizes how important her father
					is to Lydia and her kids, Carmen must work hard to keep that anger
					in check.

