The son of a long line of wizards, Malfoy is the opposite
				of Harry in his familiarity with the Hogwarts experience, his sense
				of entitlement, his snobbery, and his generally unpleasant character.
				Rowling includes Malfoy in the story partly as a foil to Harry’s
				character; in seeing how unlikable Malfoy is, we appreciate all
				the more Harry’s kindness and generosity of spirit. For example,
				right after Malfoy insults Ron’s poverty on the train ride to Hogwarts,
				Harry buys double the number of pastries that he needs and shares
				them with Ron. Malfoy’s snobbish insistence on only socializing
				with children of the best families, his selfishness, and his overwhelming
				aura of superiority all resemble similar characteristics in Dudley
				Dursley, Harry’s nemesis in the Muggle world. The similarity between
				Malfoy and Dudley is important in reminding us that Harry’s new
				life will not be an escape from his old problems. Malfoy’s presence throughout
				the preparatory stages of Harry’s educational adventure is a rude
				awakening to the realities of the wizards’ world, which includes
				detestable characters like Malfoy. At Hogwarts, Harry will not be
				surrounded simply by kindness, but will have to face unpleasantness
				as well, just as he has earlier in his life.

	But Malfoy also plays a somewhat deeper role in the story,
				at least symbolically. He is mean-spirited and nasty, but there
				are hints that in time he may become far worse than nasty; he may
				blossom into a truly evil character like Voldemort. The Latin word draco means
				“dragon,” and the French words mal and foi mean
				“bad faith.” We sometimes suspect that Draco Malfoy may indeed be
				a “bad faith dragon,” a monster of ill will. Perhaps he is a dragon
				still being incubated, like Hagrid’s baby dragon that will soon
				grow into a destructive monster. Malfoy belongs to the darkly powerful
				house of Slytherin, as did Voldemort. His total lack of redeeming
				features makes him almost as flat a villain as Voldemort. Like Voldemort, Malfoy
				is not so much a realistic character as a caricature of badness.
				Of course, we do not know what Malfoy will become in the future.
				But his presence at Hogwarts reminds us that every generation will
				have its heroes and its villains, and that the struggle between
				right and wrong will always continue.

