The Player is the most mysterious of the play’s characters.
				He seems to possess a far greater understanding of the events transpiring
				than does either Rosencrantz or Guildenstern. The Player’s witty speeches
				often hint at the possibility that he could reveal the truth if only
				Rosencrantz and Guildenstern knew how to ask the right questions.
				Upon first meeting the pair, the Player claims to recognize them
				as artists like himself, a description that implies an awareness that
				they are all merely actors in a drama that Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
				do not understand and can barely acknowledge. Similarly, the Player
				makes several remarks that reflect on Rosencrantz and Guildenstern’s
				plight, although in a way that the pair fails to grasp, such as
				when he tells them that life is a terrible gamble or when he says
				that the normal experience of existence is one of confusion and doubt.
				The Player’s unexplained mastery of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern’s
				experiences extends to their final moments, when he seems to have
				anticipated their deaths and the complicated mix of feelings they
				go through as their mortality descends upon them.

The Player’s air of mysterious control and omniscience
				contrasts sharply with his shameful occupation as a pimp for the
				men in his acting troupe, whose bodies he will happily sell if the
				opportunity arises. Guildenstern holds this fact against the Player
				and tricks him into an unwinnable bet, partly out of disgust and
				a desire to punish the Player for his amoral attitude. Although
				the Player occasionally seems embarrassed by his profession, he
				generally retains a haughty attitude, secure in his knowledge of
				Rosencrantz and Guildenstern’s fate and fully aware that his troupe
				fills an unacknowledged social need and will therefore always be
				in demand. The Player’s confidence is also apparent in his serious
				belief in the integrity of theater in general and the Tragedians’
				performances in particular. This belief infuriates the skeptical
				and philosophical Guildenstern, but the Player remains entirely
				unflappable in the face of Guildenstern’s rage. The Player’s combination
				of a lowly, shameful appearance with dazzling wit, mysterious power,
				and defiant confidence make him an unlikely but fascinating ringmaster
				for the play’s circus of confusion.

