Frank wants to go on a cycling trip with his friends from
					school, and convinces Laman to let him borrow his bicycle. In return,
					he promises to empty Laman’s chamber pot every day and to run all
					of Laman’s errands.

	One day at the library, the librarian gives Frank a book
					called Butler’s Lives of the Saints. The deaths
					of the virgin martyrs, “worse than any horror film,” fascinate Frank.
					He does not know what the word “virgin” means, and although he looks
					in the dictionary, the definition is too abstract to be of help.
					The librarian, Miss O’ Riordan, is so impressed by Frank’s supposed
					religious zeal that she writes to congratulate Angela on her son.

	Frank’s teacher, Mr. O’Halloran, tells Angela that her
					son is intelligent and must continue school instead of becoming
					a messenger boy and wasting his talents. On his advice, Angela takes
					Frank to the Christian Brothers to inquire about further schooling,
					but the priest there slams the door in the McCourts’ faces, telling
					them that there is no room for Frank. This infuriates Angela.

	The post office supervisor offers Frank a job as a telegram
					messenger. This job offer pleases Frank, who is anxious to finish
					school. Mr. O’Halloran tells his students that he is disgusted with
					the class system that forces smart boys into menial jobs, and he
					tells Frank that he should leave for America. Frank tries to apply
					to be a chaplain in the Foreign Legion, but his doctor thinks Frank
					too young and refuses to give him the necessary physical examination.

	Frank worries that he is committing a sin by masturbating.
					He also worries about the fact that his mother is sleeping with
					Laman Griffin. The day before Frank is due to go on his cycling
					trip, he forgets to empty Laman’s chamber pot. Angered, Laman says
					that Frank cannot borrow his bike. Frank protests that Laman is
					breaking his promise, and Laman starts beating Frank. Frank leaves
					the house and goes to stay with his Uncle Ab Sheehan.

Angela sends Michael to Ab Sheehan’s house with food for
					Frank. Michael feels bereft without his big brother, and asks Frank
					to come home. Frank refuses, but feels guilty. It tears at his heart
					to watch Michael walk away in his broken shoes and his raggedy clothes,
					and he thinks of all the things he will buy for Michael once he
					gets his job at the post office.

	Frank spends his days going on long walks in the countryside.
					He is ashamed that he masturbates, especially when he once masturbates
					on a hill, “in full view of Ireland.”

	Uncle Ab refuses to give Frank food, so Frank steals
					milk and bread from wealthy houses. He concludes that since he is
					doomed for his sins anyway, a few more will not make any difference.
					Still, he feels that he is little more than a beggar, standing outside
					stores and asking for leftover fish and chips.

	At the library, Frank happens upon a sex manual written
					by Lin Yutang, and, after reading it, finally understands the mechanics
					of intercourse. He says, “My father lied to me for years about the Angel
					on the Seventh Step.” When the shocked librarian discovers that
					Frank has been reading the manual, she orders him to leave. Frank
					falls asleep in a park and dreams of virgin martyrs dressed in swimsuits.
					He wakes up to discover that he is having a wet dream, and people
					in the park are watching him ejaculate.

	Frank returns to Ab’s house and washes his clothes in
					preparation for his first day of work as a messenger boy. He finds
					a loaf of bread that Ab has hidden in his coat pocket and helps
					himself to one slice, drinking a glass of water as he eats to make
					himself feel more full. Because his clothes are still drying and
					he is cold, Frank puts on an old woolen dress of his grandmother’s
					and goes to bed. His Aunt Aggie brings his drunk uncle home from
					the pub and finds him in his grandmother’s dress. Frank explains
					and says that he is living with Ab until he can afford to buy a
					house for his mother and brothers. His aunt concedes that this is
					“more than your father would do.”

Although Frank does not comment on Mr. O’Halloran’s actions, McCourt
					makes it clear to the reader that O’Halloran is an inspirational
					and good man with a keen sense of social injustice. The teacher’s
					indignation at the unfairness of the class system is the first such
					anger Frank or the reader has heard about Frank’s supposed lot in
					life. For the first time, someone is prompting Frank to think about the
					unseen forces that keep poor people poor. Although Frank does not
					explicitly comment on O’Halloran’s ideas, he demonstrates that he
					has noted his teacher’s righteous anger; when he reports on O’Halloran’s
					speech, he replicates its fury, saying, “[Mr. O’Halloran] is disgusted
					by this free and independent Ireland that keeps a class system foisted
					on us by the English, [and says] that we are throwing our talented
					children on the dungheap.”

	Like Mr. O’Halloran, Angela is angry that Frank cannot
					get the education he deserves. Angela’s anger is directed not at
					the class system, however, but at the church. In previous chapters
					there were subtle indications that although Angela brings her boys
					up as Catholics, she does not embrace the church: she was not the
					one to take Frank to church on Christmas, and she did not seem overly
					concerned with the technical cleanliness of Frank’s soul prior to
					his Confirmation. In Chapter XIII, however, she finally voices some
					of her frustration with the church. She tells Frank, “That’s the
					second time a door was slammed in your face by the Church,” and
					she exhorts him never to let anyone slam a door in his face again.

	Frank continues to worry about masturbating, which one
					priest terms the “vile sin of self-abuse.” Although the priests
					assure the boys that when they masturbate the Virgin Mary weeps,
					Christ’s wounds are reopened, and they take a step toward hell,
					Frank cannot stop himself from masturbating. His natural urges come
					into conflict with the stern warnings of the priests, and his guilt
					deepens.

	Frank disapproves of the sexual relationship his mother
					has with Laman. When Laman beats Frank, Frank thinks that his mother should
					demonstrate her loyalty to her son by sleeping alone, and he is
					disgusted when instead, “she cries and begs till there’s whispering and
					grunting and moaning and nothing.”

	Although young Frank does not fully recognize his mother’s pain,
					McCourt shows the reader how difficult the situation is for Angela.
					She has no money to buy or rent a place of her own, and so to ensure
					the survival of her children and keep a roof over their heads, she
					must stay with Laman and keep him happy. Laman’s mistreatment of
					her children torments Angela. When he laughs and assigns Frank the
					humiliating job of emptying his chamber pot, Angela “stares into
					the dead ashes in the fireplace.” When Laman beats Frank, Angela
					screams and protests. Still, she sleeps with Laman on the same night
					that Laman abuses Frank. McCourt does not make it clear whether
					their sexual relations are partially a relief to Angela in her loneliness,
					or whether they are simply an odious duty she feels compelled to
					perform in order to keep Laman satisfied.

	Frank is determined to move to America and to someday
					provide for his mother and brothers. He would rather “jump into
					the River Shannon” than give up on his dream. 

