The protagonist of Gone with the Wind, Scarlett
				is a dark-haired, green-eyed Georgia belle who struggles through
				the hardships of the Civil War and Reconstruction. Scarlett exhibits
				more of her father’s hard-headedness than her mother’s refined Southern
				manners. Although initially she tries to behave prettily, her instincts
				rise up against social restrictions. Determination defines Scarlett
				and drives her to achieve everything she desires by any means necessary.
				This determination first manifests itself in her narcissistic and
				sometimes backstabbing efforts to excite the admiration of every
				young man in the neighborhood. Later, under threat of starvation
				and even death, she is determined to survive and does so by picking
				cotton, running her entire plantation, forging a successful business,
				and even killing a man.

	Scarlett also aims to win Ashley Wilkes, and her failure
				to do so guides the plot of the novel. Ashley’s marriage to Melanie
				Hamilton and rejection of Scarlett drive nearly all of Scarlett’s
				important subsequent decisions. Scarlett marries Charles Hamilton
				to hurt Ashley, stays by Melanie’s side through the war because
				she promises Ashley she will, and loses her true love, Rhett Butler,
				because of her persistent desire to win Ashley.

	Scarlett possesses remarkable talent for business and
				leadership. She recovers her father’s plantation, Tara, after the
				war leaves it decimated, and she achieves great success with her
				sawmill in Atlanta. Despite her sharp intelligence, however, she
				has almost no ability to understand the motivations and feelings
				of herself or others. Scarlett lives her life rationally: she decides
				what constitutes success, finds the most effective means to succeed,
				and does not consider concepts like honor and kindness. She often
				professes to see no other choices than the ones she makes. 

	Scarlett’s development precisely mirrors the development
				of the South. She changes from spoiled teenager to hard-working
				widow to wealthy opportunist, reflecting the South’s change from
				leisure society to besieged nation to compromised survivor. Scarlett embodies
				both Old and New South. She clings to Ashley, who symbolizes the
				idealized lost world of chivalry and manners, but she adapts wonderfully
				to the harsh and opportunistic world of the New South, ultimately
				clinging to dangerous Rhett, who, like Scarlett, symbolizes the
				combination of old and new.

