Free-spirited Bridget is more confident, courageous, and
				daring than all her friends put together, and she hurtles through
				life on high spirits and adventure. With energy to spare, Bridget
				loves playing soccer, and she excels at it, winning the respect
				of her teammates and sometimes the frustration of her coach, who
				recognizes Bridget’s potential but also her tendency to show off.
				Bridget hates being indoors, preferring to spend all of her time
				outside doing something physical, such as running or swimming. She
				never slows down—and she has the enormous appetite appropriate to
				such an active person. Bridget applies that same energy and enthusiasm
				to her romantic pursuits. She knows she’s attractive to men, and
				that attention gives her a high. In the rare cases when someone
				tells Bridget “no,” she takes it as encouragement to try harder.
				Bridget is the kind of girl who won’t stop until she gets what she
				wants.

Beneath all this energy, determination, and verve, however,
				is a girl who has lost her mother and who, at times, feels very
				much alone. Readers don’t know exactly what happened to Bridget’s mother,
				other than that her death was connected to “bad depression” and
				was probably a suicide. Bridget fills her life to the brim with
				excitement and activity, never giving herself time to stop and reflect.
				She keeps herself afloat because she doesn’t have any opportunity
				to sink. Good decisions and bad decisions pile up on top of one
				another, and Bridget isn’t the sort to consider the wisdom or consequences
				of her actions before she plows ahead. The result of her headstrong
				way of living is trouble handling the consequences of her actions.
				When she does get Eric, for instance, and finally stops to think
				about what she’s done, she can’t handle the reality and retreats
				to her bed. Bridget’s highs are very high, but her lows are very
				low. In the low times, she relies on her friends to support her and
				remind her that she will never be alone.

