
Light in August’s main protagonist, Joe
				Christmas, also stands as one of the novel’s most enigmatic characters.
				An angry man, he is a shadow figure who walks the fringes, treading
				neither lightly nor comfortably in both the black and white worlds.
				When Joe first appears, he provokes a healthy amount of curiosity
				on the part of the mill workers, accompanied by contempt for his
				smug aloofness and other disarming qualities. Though Faulkner provides
				many details of Joe’s life and character over the course of his
				tale, Christmas still remains a distant, inscrutable figure, closed
				and elusive. At the mill he is a cipher, a blank slate onto which
				others project their own biased and subjective notions of who they
				think the mysterious man truly is. Many believe that he hails from
				an unknown foreign country.

Several loose correlations connect Joe Christmas’s life
				to that of Jesus. The two figures share the same initials, Joe was
				left on the orphanage steps on Christmas, and Joe is in his early
				thirties when he is killed in the standoff in Hightower’s kitchen.
				But these suggestions of similarity are loose and gestural, allowing
				Faulkner to complicate and darken the moral nature of his protagonist.
				Faulkner’s characterization of Joe Christmas challenges and ultimately
				subverts any Christlike comparisons. Any attempt to see Joe Christmas as
				a martyr is complicated by his life of violence and his general
				contempt for humanity. He emerges as a classically flawed and conflicted
				modern antihero. A brooding loner, he is a man without an identity.
				Unaware of his birth name, much less his racial heritage, he wanders
				in a futile search for a place where he can belong. Whereas Jesus’
				life inspired emulation and praise, Joe Christmas generates little
				sympathy from those around him. The grim conditions that surrounded
				his upbringing do little to explain or dismiss his compulsive need
				to inflict harm on others—and, in two cases, to go so far as to
				take a life. Christmas’s attempt to reclaim and establish his identity
				in the world is marred by a disdain for the very people who could
				possibly provide him with the comfort he seeks.

