Pi’s companion throughout his ordeal at sea is Richard
				Parker, a 450-pound Royal Bengal tiger. Unlike
				many novels in which animals speak or act like humans, Richard Parker
				is portrayed as a real animal that acts in ways true to his species.
				It can be difficult to accept that a tiger and a boy could exist
				on a lifeboat alone, however, in the context of the novel, it seems
				plausible. Captured as a cub, Parker grew up in the zoo and is accustomed
				to a life in captivity. He is used to zookeepers training and providing
				for him, so he is able to respond to cues from Pi and submit to
				his dominance. However, he is no docile house cat. He has been tamed,
				but he still acts instinctually, swimming for the lifeboat in search
				of shelter and killing the hyena and the blind castaway for food.
				When the two wash up on the shore of Mexico, Richard Parker doesn’t
				draw out his parting with Pi, he simply runs off into the jungle,
				never to be seen again.

Though Richard Parker is quite fearsome, ironically his
				presence helps Pi stay alive. Alone on the lifeboat, Pi has many
				issues to face in addition to the tiger onboard: lack of food and
				water, predatory marine life, treacherous sea currents, and exposure
				to the elements. Overwhelmed by the circumstances and terrified
				of dying, Pi becomes distraught and unable to take action. However,
				he soon realizes that his most immediate threat is Richard Parker.
				His other problems now temporarily forgotten, Pi manages, through
				several training exercises, to dominate Parker. This success gives
				him confidence, making his other obstacles seem less insurmountable. Renewed,
				Pi is able to take concrete steps toward ensuring his continued
				existence: searching for food and keeping himself motivated. Caring
				and providing for Richard Parker keeps Pi busy and passes the time.
				Without Richard Parker to challenge and distract him, Pi might have
				given up on life. After he washes up on land in Mexico, he thanks
				the tiger for keeping him alive.

Richard Parker symbolizes Pi’s most animalistic instincts.
				Out on the lifeboat, Pi must perform many actions to stay alive
				that he would have found unimaginable in his normal life. An avowed
				vegetarian, he must kill fish and eat their flesh. As time progresses,
				he becomes more brutish about it, tearing apart birds and greedily stuffing
				them in his mouth, the way Richard Parker does. After Richard Parker
				mauls the blind Frenchman, Pi uses the man’s flesh for bait and
				even eats some of it, becoming cannibalistic in his unrelenting
				hunger. In his second story to the Japanese investigators, Pi is Richard
				Parker. He kills his mother’s murderer. Parker is the version of
				himself that Pi has invented to make his story more palatable, both
				to himself and to his audience. The brutality of his mother’s death
				and his own shocking act of revenge are too much for Pi to deal
				with, and he finds it easier to imagine a tiger as the killer, rather than
				himself in that role.

