In the darkness, shouts are heard, indicating that Claudius
					has responded angrily to the Tragedians’ production. The lines shouted are
					from Hamlet. The lights slowly come back on. It
					is dawn, and Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are lying on the floor
					in the same position and costumes as the dead spies were moments
					ago. The pair tries to figure out which way is east, and Guildenstern
					predicts that people are about to begin streaming into the room
					and confusing them. Immediately thereafter, Claudius calls from
					offstage and then enters, telling the men that Hamlet has killed
					Polonius. Claudius asks Rosencrantz and Guildenstern to find Hamlet
					and Polonius’s body. They struggle to decide what to do, afraid
					to leave each other and unsure of where to go.

Rosencrantz spots Hamlet in the wings. Guildenstern decides they
					should trap Hamlet, and the two men tie their belts together and
					hold them across one side of the stage. Rosencrantz’s pants fall as
					he removes his belt.

Hamlet enters on the other side of the stage, dragging
					Polonius’s body, and quickly exits when he sees Rosencrantz and
					Guildenstern. They call Hamlet back in, and he returns alone, refusing
					to tell them what he has done with Polonius’s body. Hamlet accuses
					them of being Claudius’s pawns. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern walk
					with Hamlet to one side of the stage, where they see Claudius about
					to enter. Following Hamlet’s lead, they bow their respects, only
					to have Hamlet sneak away from them as they do. Hamlet has tricked
					them into bowing in the opposite direction of Claudius, who enters behind
					Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. Claudius urges them to bring in Hamlet,
					but, before they have to act, Hamlet arrives escorted by guards.

Rosencrantz and Guildenstern discuss their situation and
					the fact that they now have to escort Hamlet to England. Rosencrantz
					overhears Hamlet in conversation with a soldier and wonders when
					they will be able to stop waiting around. Hamlet and the soldier
					enter. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern discuss the changing of the
					seasons, noting that warmth and light seem to be draining away.
					In the distance, they hear the music of the Tragedians. Hamlet asks
					Rosencrantz and Guildenstern to go ahead of him, and Guildenstern wonders
					if they should go. Rosencrantz tells him that they may as well continue
					since they have already come so far, saying that anything may still
					happen. The stage goes black.

The action in this section of the play emphasizes the
					Player’s earlier comment about death within plays: characters who
					are written to die must die. Readers familiar with the play Hamlet know
					that Hamlet kills Polonius, because Shakespeare, the author of the
					play, wrote the plot that way. As a character, Hamlet may or may
					not have killed Polonius as a result of his madness. But, ultimately,
					his motivations do not matter in Stoppard’s work. Hamlet must kill Polonius,
					because that is what Shakespeare’s stage direction says he must
					do. In Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead, the
					characters do not speculate about what may have prompted Hamlet
					to kill Polonius. Instead, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern merely accept
					that he has done so and proceed from there. Stoppard kills off the
					character of Polonius because Shakespeare wrote it as such, and
					Stoppard’s work largely mirrors the plot of Shakespeare’s work.

Rosencrantz and Guildenstern get excited about the murder
					of Polonius because it gives them a chance to actually attempt to
					do something. Guildenstern does not contemplate the reasons for
					the murder or try to use logic, perhaps because he has taken the
					Player’s earlier call to action to heart. First, Rosencrantz and
					Guildenstern literally march around the stage. Then, they decide
					to set a trap for Hamlet using their belts. But their plan leads
					only to slapstick: Hamlet enters with the body, then exits quickly.
					Rosencrantz loses his pants. Then, tricked by Hamlet, Rosencrantz
					and Guildenstern bow to emptiness when Claudius enters from another
					side of the stage. By the end of the act, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
					cannot do anything, for Hamlet has been captured by guards. As usual,
					their misunderstanding of the situation causes them to miss their opportunity
					to make a choice that might cause an impact or affect some kind
					of change.

Sometimes Guildenstern comes close to realizing that he
					is not a real person but is actually only a character in two plays,
					yet another instance of Stoppard’s use of self-referentiality. Rosencrantz
					and Guildenstern have minor roles in Hamlet and
					major roles in Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead.
					Earlier in Act II, Guildenstern expressed his desire for art to
					imitate life. When the lights come up, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
					are positioned exactly as the spies were positioned during the rehearsal
					for The Murder of Gonzago, the play within a play.
					But, as when Rosencrantz vaguely recognized the spies, here Guildenstern
					laments the fact that now that the men are awake, people will soon
					begin entering, asking them to do things and making the men feel
					very confused, all of which has been happening throughout the entire
					play. Guildenstern even notes that the characters tend to confuse
					Rosencrantz with Guildenstern and vice versa. He has unknowingly
					described the plot of Stoppard’s work, a fact that Stoppard emphasizes
					by having Claudius enter as soon as Guildenstern has made that self-referential
					comment. Guildenstern’s comments are meant to be funny but should
					also remind readers of Stoppard’s literary project: he wanted to
					see what would happen if he removed two characters from Hamlet and
					gave them their own play.

