Cosmo-Slotnick Pictures plans to build an enormous
					skyscraper and holds an international competition to select an architect.
					Francon encourages Keating to submit a design in the firm’s name.
					Keating knows his messy design cannot win the contest. Shamefaced,
					he goes to see Roark, who works all night reshaping Keating’s design.
					After months without work, Roark’s money begins to run out. One
					day, Cameron’s sister tells Roark that Cameron is dying. Roark hurries
					to New Jersey to see Cameron. As he dies, Cameron tells Roark to
					ignore his earlier warnings and pursue his goals without ever compromising.

Keating asks Katie if they can put off their marriage
					until the results of the Cosmo-Slotnick competition arrive. If Keating
					wins, he will become a partner in the firm and win a secure salary.
					Keating spends most of his time with Dominique and tries to kiss
					her one night. Indifferent to his passion, she tells him she believes
					herself to be completely frigid. Keating again feels panic and fear
					but remembers Dominique is Francon’s daughter and asks her to marry
					him. The proposal surprises Dominique, but she promises him seriously that
					she will marry him if she ever needs to punish herself.

Keating grows anxious about the outcome of the Cosmo-Slotnick competition.
					Lucius Heyer is dying, and his position at Francon & Heyer will
					soon become vacant. If Keating does not win the competition, Francon
					may decide to offer the partnership to someone else. Keating has
					evidence that Heyer once inflated construction estimates and goes
					to Heyer’s home to blackmail him into retiring before the results
					of the competition are announced. While begging Keating not to expose
					him, Heyer suffers a second stroke and dies. To his shock, Keating
					discovers that deep inside he wanted to kill Heyer. A few days later,
					Keating discovers that Heyer left him his entire estate and that
					he has won the Cosmo-Slotnick competition.

	Keating becomes an overnight celebrity, but frets over
					the fact that Dominique despises him and that Roark actually created
					the prizewinning design. After Dominique leaves to spend the summer at
					her home in Connecticut, Keating decides to go see the penniless Roark.
					When Keating arrives, Roark is waiting for a phone call from a bank,
					which is his only prospective project. Keating writes Roark a check
					for five hundred dollars to keep quiet about his help on the Cosmo-Slotnick
					building. Roark returns the check on the condition that Keating
					never mention Roark’s involvement with such a mediocre structure.
					Keating reels at this insult and breaks down. Before Keating leaves,
					he vows to break Roark. A few days later, the bank that is Roark’s
					only potential customer tells him that they will hire him to design
					a simple Greek façade in keeping with its image as a sound financial
					institution. Roark refuses to compromise and refuses the contract,
					even though it means shutting down his office. Roark asks Mike for
					a job and Mike refers him to a granite quarry in Connecticut.

With each decision they make, Roark and Keating solidify
					their personalities and walk farther down the paths they have chosen.
					Rand sets up a particularly sharp contrast between the two men by
					putting them in identical situations, setting them down by the bedside
					of dying men who are also their architectural elders. Roark rushes
					to the dying man he respects. From his deathbed, Cameron confirms all
					of Roark’s most deeply felt beliefs. In complete contrast, Keating rushes
					to the bed of a dying man in order to threaten him with humiliation.
					His cruelty kills Heyer, and Keating understands his own murderous
					impulses for the first time. 

We already know that by nature Roark is determined and
					independent, and he demonstrates that his nature cannot be swayed
					by adversity. He confirms his strength by refusing to compromise
					his principles no matter what the cost. In a particularly impressive
					gesture, Roark rejects the bank commission even though it means
					sacrificing his business. His rejection of the commission is all
					the more striking in that the commission would have required only
					a small compromise. The other clients Roark refuses differ fundamentally from
					his vision, but the bankers request only a small change in his design.
					While Roark reveals the extent of his strength, Keating reveals
					the extent of his repellant personality. Keating combines seemingly
					irreconcilable character flaws. He is at once the cringing mama’s
					boy who cannot think for himself and the murderous bully who kills
					Heyer with his scare tactics. Keating becomes more loathsome with
					every appearance. 

	While Keating lusts for recognition, Roark abhors it.
					Keating wants to become partner in the firm not because he craves
					money or power, but because he thinks this position will make others
					look on him as a genius. In contrast, Roark makes a point of avoiding
					recognition. Although Mike works on Roark’s houses and Cameron and Heller
					recommend him to clients, Roark never solicits these kindnesses.
					Roark knows that the kind of men who admire him are, like him, hardworking
					and uncompromising. They would not appreciate pandering even if
					he were inclined to pander.

	Dominique has elements of both Keating and Roark, as
					her frigidity shows. Dominique accepts Keating’s advances with stoicism. She
					does not resist him despite her clear lack of interest. The world interests
					Dominique so little that passing judgment or mustering a strong
					opinion seems strange to her. Like Roark, she reacts with bored dispassion
					to personal encounters that would provoke rage, misery, or embarrassment
					in most people. Dominique is frigid because she has never experienced
					truly arousing passion. In this respect, she resembles Keating,
					who does not know what he wants from life because he has never had
					any experiences worth mentioning. 

