When Quintana wakes up, Didion reassures her and promises
					to stay until they can leave together. She realizes that, ever since
					she and John adopted Quintana, her promise to take care of Quintana has
					been the foundation of their relationship. As Quintana grew older,
					Didion realized she could not always protect her. Didion comes to
					understand that her lifelong fear of things being out of her control
					is coming true.

She tries to ascertain what exactly happened to Quintana.
					Since Quintana had been on anticoagulants, the bleed she suffered
					could have been either the cause or an effect of her fall. Didion
					tries to find out which it was from the doctors but soon realizes
					that the question is irrelevant, since either way the consequences
					remain the same. The doctor tells her that the coma could last for
					days or weeks, and that while they’re optimistic, it would be several
					days before they know what shape her brain is in. This concern pales
					in comparison to the possible consequences of re-infection, pneumonia,
					or further swelling that would necessitate re-operation.

During the twenty-four days Didion spends at the hospital,
					she reads and re-reads Intensive Care: A Doctor’s Journal by
					John F. Murray, which documents one four-week period during his
					tenure as an attending physician in an ICU. With information gained
					from the book, Didion is able to ask pointed and informed questions
					of the doctors. She often does not understand what the doctors are
					saying to her, so she buys a copy of Clinical Neuroanatomy, which turns
					out to be virtually incomprehensible. However, one story from the
					appendix stands out, a mysterious narrative called the “gilded boy
					story” that can be used to test memory and comprehension in patients
					coming out of a comatose state. The story concerns a young boy who
					was dressed as an angel 300 years ago to
					celebrate the coronation of the pope but who died from the poisonous
					gold foil he was wrapped in. Patients are then asked to retell the
					story in their own words. The strange, nonsensical story seems to
					represent the confusion of the entire situation that Didion faces.

Back in late January at Beth Israel, Didion identified
					an experience she called “the vortex effect.” While lost in her
					thoughts, she had a sudden memory of a former colleague at Vogue, “X,”
					who had an abortion in the same hospital, an event that Didion had
					fictionalized in her novel Play It As It Lays.
					The memory of writing the novel inevitably brought her back to memories
					of Quintana, which set off the vortex effect, a phenomenon in which
					Didion becomes swept up in a series of intense reminiscences about
					her life with John and Quintana. To prevent the vortex effect while
					in Los Angeles, she will have to avoid any venue that might remind
					her of the twenty-four years she lived there with her family. Her
					hotel, the Beverly Wilshire, is an unusual exception, despite the
					fact that it had been the family’s home base while working on a
					film. Instead of triggering the vortex effect, the hotel gives her
					a sense of familiarity and security.

Didion establishes a routine of ordering the same breakfast
					every morning, driving the same daily route to the hospital, returning
					to the hotel in the afternoon to rest, and having dinner with friends
					in the evening. Despite her careful precautions, she often finds
					herself blinded by tears while driving past a landmark she had not
					remembered to avoid. In one instance, while preparing to go to the
					hospital, she sees a commercial that features a stretch of coastal
					highway that sets off a flood of memories about a house the family
					rented after Quintana was born. In another instance, while driving
					to Rite Aid, she remembers a bistro she and John had frequented,
					which in turn set off memories of a trip she took with John to Bogota.
					The vortex effect of these memories prevents her from making it
					to Rite Aid.

Quintana’s illness sets the vortex effect into motion,
					a recurring motif that Didion uses to demonstrate how every aspect
					of her life is completely bound to her identity as John’s wife and
					collaborator and Quintana’s mother. The vortex effect strikes unexpectedly
					and occurs when a moment of contemplation or passive observation triggers
					powerful memories and an intense emotional response. Once again,
					Didion finds that she has no control, realizing that her perception
					of the world is inevitably informed by her memories. While magical
					thinking is a process through which Didion attempts to manage her
					feelings and responses by imagining a degree of control over the
					world around her, the vortex effect is a passive experience that
					reminds her of the limits of her control. The fact that the vortex
					effect happens so naturally and suddenly highlights her fragile
					emotional state. Though she may be trying to manage her situation
					by remaining stoic and taking charge, the vortex effect functions
					as a painful reminder of her husband’s death and her daughter’s
					illness and her inability to do anything about them.

Didion attempts to educate herself as much as she can
					about Quintana’s condition as a way of using knowledge to exert
					control, but she finds that the process of understanding the dense
					medical texts presents greater challenges than did her readings
					on grief. With grief literature, Didion had to look only to herself,
					examining her own responses and feelings and relating them to the
					literary expressions and psychological studies that she read. Even
					when their conclusions were frustrating, they gave her models to
					which she could compare her own experience. Quintana’s subdural
					hematoma presents a much more daunting challenge, since she must
					use dense medical texts to figure out what’s happening, rather than
					simply evaluating her own responses to what she knows has happened. Even
					when armed with the right information, she again faces a situation
					outside of her control. Didion realizes that, just as she could not
					prevent John from dying, she cannot make Quintana better, no matter
					how much she learns or how much she promises to protect her daughter.
					The knowledge of her own fallibility once again puts her in the
					frustrating position of the observer desperate to exert some kind
					of control but unable to change the course of the situation.

Didion’s highly analytical meditations on grief distinguish The Year
						of Magical Thinking from confessional memoirs that focus solely
					on individual experience. In the past twenty years, personal memoirs
					have flooded the publishing market and become increasingly popular
					with audiences. The recent flap around the authenticity of personal
					accounts like James Frey’s A Million Little Pieces highlights
					the often sensational subject matter found in memoirs, which tends
					to emphasize personal trauma as a way of creating catharsis, or
					emotional release, for both writer and reader. Didion avoids this
					model, choosing instead to mix her personal experience with observations
					and reflections on cultural trends and behaviors. While the section
					of the book that takes place during Quintana’s stay at UCLA stays
					focused on Didion’s grief, she weaves in commentary about cultural
					attitudes toward sickness and hospitals. By connecting her individual
					experience to larger cultural trends regarding death, illness, grief,
					and mourning, Didion avoids sensationalizing her experience.

