Though she is dead for most of the novel, Addie is one
				of its most important characters, as her unorthodox wish to be buried
				near her blood relatives rather than with her own family is at the
				core of the story. Addie, whose voice is expressed through Cora
				Tull’s memories and through her own brief section in the narrative,
				appears to be a strong-willed and intelligent woman haunted by a
				sense of disillusionment. Unable to bring herself to love the coarse,
				helpless Anse or the children she bears him, Addie sees marital
				love and motherhood as empty concepts, words that exist solely to
				fill voids in people’s lives. After she bears a second child to
				Anse, Addie first expresses her wish to be buried far away, stating
				her belief that “the reason for living [is] to get ready to stay
				dead a long time.” The little value she does find in life, from
				her brief affair with Whitfield and her love for her son Jewel,
				ends on a morbid note. Jewel treats Addie harshly while she is alive,
				and only once she is dead does he “save [her] from the water and
				from the fire,” as she always believed he would. Addie invests her
				life and energy in a love that finds repayment and comes to fruition
				only after she is dead.

	As a corpse, Addie is equally important to the novel,
				hindering and dividing her family as much as when she is alive.
				Many of the incidents after Addie’s death reflect this feeling that
				some part of Addie is still living. Vardaman drills holes in the
				coffin so that the dead Addie might have air to breathe, and when
				Darl and Vardaman listen to the noises of the decomposing body,
				Darl claims that these sounds are Addie speaking. Even the stench
				of Addie’s corpse captivates a large audience of strangers. The
				notion that there is continuity between the articulate human voice
				of the living Addie and the putrid biological mass that is the dead
				Addie is among the most emotionally powerful ideas presented in
				the novel.

