Stoppard deliberately refrains from giving much description
				of either of his main characters. Both Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are
				meant to be “everyman” figures, more or less average men who represent
				humanity in general. Nevertheless, both men have specific character
				traits. Rosencrantz is decidedly the more easygoing of the two,
				happy to continue flipping coins with little concern about the possible
				implications of their pattern of landing heads up. Rosencrantz spends
				a great deal of the play confused by both what is happening around
				him and Guildenstern’s reactions to their situation, but he rarely
				engages in the overt despair that is characteristic of Guildenstern.
				Rosencrantz is pragmatic and seeks simple and efficient solutions
				to the pair’s problems rather than philosophical explanations of
				them, a trait that leads Guildenstern to believe that his friend
				is complacent and unwilling or unable to think seriously and deeply.

Rosencrantz reveals himself to be more complicated than
				Guildenstern believes, however, and his apparently straightforward
				attitude of pragmatism and breezy bewilderment peels back to reveal deeper
				feelings, both positive and negative. Despite their continued frustrations
				and problems, Rosencrantz does not lose sight of Guildenstern’s
				feelings, and he awkwardly tries to cheer his friend up by offering
				him the opportunity to win several easy bets. Rosencrantz also tries
				to help Guildenstern in a more serious and sophisticated way by
				encouraging him to find personal happiness and to soldier on in
				the face of apparent chaos. Rosencrantz’s positive attitude is not
				the limit of his feelings, and twice he feels terror at the realization
				of his own mortality. First, he gets afraid during his discussion of
				what it would be like to be in a coffin. Later, at the end of the
				play, he feels fear as he realizes that he is about to die. Rosencrantz
				may not be an actively philosophical man like his friend Guildenstern, but
				he is nevertheless capable of sensitive thought.

