After Lolita recovers from an illness, Humbert allows
					her to throw a small party with boys. The party isn’t a success,
					and the boys don’t impress Lolita, which is such a relief for Humbert
					that he buys her a new tennis racket. For her birthday, he buys
					her a bicycle and a book of modern American paintings, and while
					he enjoys watching her ride the bike, he remains disappointed by
					her inability to appreciate fine art.

Lolita begins rehearsing for a play entitled The
						Enchanted Hunters, in which she plays a farmer’s daughter
					who bewitches a number of hunters. Humbert notes that the play has
					the same name as the hotel he and Lolita first stayed in, but he
					doesn’t think much of it. He also doesn’t mention the coincidence
					to Lolita, for fear that she’ll mock him and his nostalgia. At the
					time, Humbert assumes the play is nothing more than a trifling work
					written specifically for schoolchildren. He tells the reader that
					he now knows the play to be a recent composition, written by a noted
					playwright. Humbert scoffs at the play’s overt romanticism and fantasy.
					One day, as Lolita rides her bike, she teasingly asks Humbert if
					the Enchanted Hunters was, in fact, the name of the hotel where
					he first raped her.

Some days later, Humbert becomes outraged when he gets
					a call from Lolita’s piano teacher, who tells him that Lolita has
					been missing her lessons. When confronted, Lolita claims she has
					been rehearsing for the play in a local park. Lolita’s friend Mona
					corroborates the story, but Humbert assumes both girls are lying.
					While Humbert and Lolita discuss the issue heatedly, he realizes
					that she’s changed and possesses fewer nymphet qualities. Humbert
					panics and threatens to take her away from Beardsley if she continues lying.
					Lolita becomes furious, and they have a loud, angry fight in which
					she accuses him of violating her and murdering her mother. Humbert
					grabs her by the wrist and attempts to restrain her. Just then,
					a neighbor calls to complain about the noise, and as Humbert apologizes,
					Lolita escapes from the house. Humbert drives around looking for
					her and finally finds her in a telephone booth. Lolita tells Humbert
					that she hates the school and the play and wants to leave Beardsley,
					but only if they go where she wants to go. Relieved, Humbert agrees
					to her demands. At home, Lolita tells Humbert to carry her upstairs,
					as she’s feeling romantic. Humbert confesses that this brought him
					to tears.

Humbert tells the school that he’s been hired as a consultant
					for a movie in Hollywood, but promises to return. Excited to be
					traveling again, Lolita plans out where they’ll go and where they’ll
					stay. As they’re driving away from the town, Edusa Gold, the acting
					coach, pulls up alongside them in her car. She says it’s a shame
					Lolita couldn’t finish the play, since the playwright himself was
					so taken with her. As Edusa drives off, Humbert asks Lolita who
					wrote the play. Lolita tells him it was some old woman, “Clare Something.” With
					that, Humbert and Lolita start their travels. 

Humbert and Lolita stay in a succession of hotels. Humbert
					keeps a very close watch on Lolita, to keep her from communicating
					with anyone he doesn’t know. However, Lolita occasionally manages
					to disappear, even under Humbert’s watchful eye. She changes her mind
					often about their destinations, sometimes wanting to stay on for
					no apparent reason. One day, Humbert goes out but suddenly feels
					nervous, and he returns to the hotel room to find Lolita completely
					dressed. Humbert’s suspicions, while still vague, grow stronger. 

Humbert secretly keeps a gun that belonged to Lolita’s
					father and stands guard with it at night. He reminds the reader
					that, in Freudian analysis, a gun represents the father’s phallus.

In these chapters, Humbert grows intensely suspicious
					of both Lolita’s increasing ability to deceive him, as well as the
					various men they meet on their travels. However, despite his mounting
					paranoia, Humbert remains unable to grasp the truth of his situation.
					For example, though he reads The Enchanted Hunters carefully
					and recognizes the strange coincidence between the play’s title
					and the name of the hotel where he and Lolita first consummated
					their relationship, he doesn’t take the production as a warning
					sign. Unable to see this coincidence as foreshadowing anything,
					Humbert can only offer a passive, ineffectual response: a intellectual,
					critical analysis of the play’s literary value. Meanwhile, The
						Enchanted Hunters brings Clare Quilty directly into Lolita’s
					life and, presumably, causes her to reevaluate her relationship
					with Humbert. The production of The Enchanted Hunters is
					the turning point at which Humbert first begins to lose Lolita,
					and he fails to recognize its significance.

Humbert’s inability to see the reality of his predicament
					also extends to his relationship with Lolita. Humbert loves what
					Lolita represents: a perfect specimen of his ideal type of female,
					the nymphet. Humbert loves an image of a girl, but not the girl
					herself. This refusal to acknowledge the real Lolita allows him
					to observe all the human elements of his iconic woman—her vulgarity,
					her duplicity, her rebelliousness—and remain steadfastly assured
					that, somehow, he can possess Lolita forever. Only after losing
					Lolita will Humbert realize how mistaken he was. At this point in
					the novel, however, Humbert is still the enchanted hunter, too spellbound
					by his obsession to comprehend the reality of his lover or the imminent threat
					Quilty represents. 

In these chapters, Lolita seems less whimsical and more
					calculating. Up to this point, we might have assumed that Lolita’s
					temperamental moods could be attributed to the typically mercurial
					nature of all teenagers or to the extreme pressure of leading a
					secret, deviant lifestyle. However, Lolita’s moods seem more planned
					now. For example, she explains away her missed piano lessons with
					preternatural calm, even arranging for Mona to lie for her. For
					once, Humbert’s suspicions seem justified. Humbert blames her dramatic training
					for teaching Lolita to dissemble, and he’s not entirely wrong: the
					theater is responsible for her duplicity, but not
					quite in the way Humbert imagines. Once again, Humbert offers an
					ineffectual, intellectual response, making a symbolic connection
					between the necessary pretense involved in acting and the apparent
					pretense Lolita is employing. 

Humbert misses the more simple, straightforward explanation for
					Lolita’s lies: the theater is responsible for Lolita’s betrayal because
					the school play introduces her to Quilty. Humbert’s attempts to
					keep their relationship from changing, as well as his attempt to
					arrest Lolita’s growth and keep her in a perpetual state of nymphethood,
					end up having the opposite effect: pushing Lolita away and resisting
					his fantasy role for her. Lolita and Humbert act out a version of
					a more traditional parent-child relationship, with Lolita lying
					and evading her father figure in order to challenge his strict,
					oppressive regulations. Humbert doesn’t grasp this element of their
					relationship, which leads him to unquestioningly accept her decision
					to leave Beardsley.

Even at this early stage, we can see how this journey
					represents a reversal of the earlier road trip. Whereas Humbert
					himself planned the first trip, in order to assert his control over
					and possession of Lolita, he now follows Lolita’s whims and desires,
					unknowingly facilitating her escape. Previously, Humbert was the
					enchanted hunter, charmed and fascinated by his prey, Lolita. Now
					Humbert has become a different kind of enchanted hunter: he’s bewitched and
					spellbound by Lolita’s duplicity, and, blinded by his own obsession,
					he is never able to clearly spot his prey, Clare Quilty. If Humbert
					has become an ineffectual hunter in these chapters, he soon realizes
					that he’s also become the hunted, as his shadowy double, Clare Quilty,
					tracks him down in order to steal Lolita.

