Gandalf’s group rides south of the River Isen. Legolas
					sees shapes moving in the distance, but he is unable to distinguish
					them clearly. The next day, Gandalf becomes alarmed, and with a
					word to his trusty horse, Shadowfax, speeds off, ordering the group
					to proceed to Helm’s Deep and to stay far from the plains of Isen.

Obeying Gandalf without knowing his reasoning, the group
					goes to the Deep, a narrow gorge in the mountains on the far side
					of the Westfold Vale. Théoden reveals that Saruman knows the region very
					well, and he foresees that there will be a great battle between the
					Orcs and the armies of Rohan. Théoden and his Riders arrive at the
					Deeping Wall, a great fortification near Helm’s Deep. They do not
					have enough provisions for a long encampment, having prepared for
					a quick battle rather than a long siege.

Suddenly, the battle begins with a great thunder, as the
					area around the Deeping Wall is flooded with Orcs. Many arrows are launched
					on both sides, and Legolas and Gimli fight valiantly. After many
					hours, the forces of Rohan grow tired. Aragorn is worried to see
					that the Orcs have crept beneath the Wall and have lit a flaming trail
					of Orc-liquor below the Riders. Aragorn goes into the Hornburg,
					the nearby citadel, to find that Éomer has not arrived. Aragorn learns
					that the Orcs have used their flaming liquid to blast through the
					Wall and seize it. Aragorn feels demoralized even though he is told
					that the Hornburg has never once been taken. The Orcs jeer at the
					Riders in the citadel, telling them to come out and meet their fate at
					the hands of the Uruk-hai. Suddenly, the roar of trumpets is heard,
					and King Théoden appears in martial splendor. The Orcs, gripped
					with fear, begin to retreat, dispersing throughout the land surrounding
					Helm’s Deep. The Hornburg yet again remains safe. Suddenly, a horseman
					clad in white appears in the distance. The Riders of Rohan hail
					Gandalf, the White Rider, on the back of Shadowfax.

Éomer, Théoden, Gandalf, Gimli, Legolas, and Aragorn all
					gather on the plain near Helm’s Deep after the victory over the
					Orcs. Éomer expresses wonder that Gandalf came at just the right
					time. Though the men are weary from battle, Gandalf urges the King
					to assemble a party to ride with him to Isengard to meet Saruman.
					Théoden chooses Éomer and twenty Riders to accompany them. Gandalf rides
					in the company of Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli. They sleep in preparation
					for the journey the next day. The slain Orcs are gathered on the
					fields.

The party sets out for Isengard the next day, passing
					through a forest of strange trees along the way. Gimli praises the
					beauty of caves to Legolas, who prefers the woods. Legolas is surprised
					to see eyes among the trees, and Gandalf explains that the forest
					is full of Ents, who are not enemies. The Riders of Rohan grieve
					over their slain fellow warriors, whose bodies litter the fields
					around them. Eventually, they reach the Misty Mountains. They sense
					that the area known as Nan Curunír, or the Wizard’s Vale, is burning.
					They see a strange black liquid pass over the ground near them.
					Gandalf orders his men to ignore it and wait until it passes.

Riding on for several days, the group finally arrives
					at Saruman’s stronghold at Isengard. They see the great stone tower
					called Orthanc, where Saruman lies in wait, surrounded by a deep
					gorge on all sides. Once Isengard was abloom with gardens and orchards, but
					ever since it has been under Saruman’s control, it has been barren
					and desolate. At the gates of Isengard, Gandalf’s group is surprised
					to find Merry and Pippin lounging and smoking. It is the first time
					Théoden has ever seen Hobbits. After a brief chat, Merry and Pippin
					deliver the message that Fangorn is waiting to meet with Gandalf
					on the northern wall of Isengard. Gandalf sets out to meet the Ent,
					accompanied by Théoden.

The appearance of Théoden at just the right moment to
					save the Hornburg from the Orc forces is the most dramatic battle
					scene in the novel thus far. Tolkien’s masterful depiction of the
					battle displays all the classic characteristics of narrative suspense.
					The scene unfolds with Aragorn’s sinking feeling that the Orc forces
					are too numerous to withstand. But then, with a clap of thunder
					and a roar of trumpets, Théoden appears, Gandalf guiding the king
					to the scene. The thunder and trumpets are less realistic details
					than mythic additions to the tale that enhance its legendary feel.
					Real battles may not take place in this somewhat melodramatic fashion,
					as the grim war scenes in great literature from Homer’s Iliad to
					Tolstoy’s War and Peace remind us. But in The
						Lord of the Rings, Tolkien aims for the more abstract level
					of myth, in which events do not necessarily happen as they do in
					real life.

Tolkien symbolically expresses the universality of the
					struggle for the Ring in some of the physical details of his description
					of the defense of Hornburg. All of the four traditional mythical
					elements of creation—earth, air, fire, and water—are present in
					the battle scene. The air is full of Orc arrows, the earth is covered
					with slain bodies, and the Orcs attempt to undermine the wall of
					the Hornburg by pouring a flaming liquid underneath it. Danger threatens
					Aragorn’s men from above and below in what is not merely a fierce
					battle, but a mythical portrayal of the threat of total devastation, symbolic
					of the collapse of life itself. Only an overwhelming savior like
					Gandalf can counter such an overwhelming destructive force.

The natural beauty of the environment arises here as an
					important symbol of the state of the universe of Middle-earth. As
					Gandalf’s traveling party passes through a forest of remarkable
					trees on its way to Wizard’s Vale, Gimli and Legolas comment on
					the trees and then have a seemingly trivial conversation about whether
					caves or woods are more beautiful. The two disagree, as the dwarf
					naturally prefers underground rock formations to the leaves and
					greenery beloved to the elf. However, the conversation reveals more about
					what Gimli and Legolas share than about how they differ, as it is
					clear that both of them value the natural environment very highly.
					As it is hard to imagine a villain like the forest-destroying Saruman
					appreciating either caves or woods, an implied parallel is made
					between moral good and a love for nature. This connection is confirmed
					later, when the group rides through Isengard and finds that the
					once-blossoming realm, full of gardens and orchards, is now bleak
					and barren ever since it has fallen under the sway of Saruman. When
					evil takes over a place, natural beauty fades, as evil scars the
					earth itself.

The surprising appearance of Merry and Pippin at Saruman’s stronghold
					of Orthanc shows us the humor of which Tolkien is capable. Though The
						Lord of the Rings is famous for its grand epic tone and
					serious treatment of the nature of good and evil, it also includes
					its share of humorous, human moments. The humor in the scene at
					Orthanc arises from the juxtaposition of the solemn and dramatic
					setting—the immense stone tower standing amid a gorge of rock—and
					the leisurely, nonchalant attitude of the hobbits who sit there.
					Merry and Pippin appear oblivious to the brewing battle—lounging,
					smoking, chatting, and generally enjoying themselves as if in their
					natural element. They are more eager to talk about different varieties
					of tobacco than about the events that shake the world around them.
					Once again, the portrayal of the hobbits challenges traditional
					notions of what epic heroes should be like. Tolkien, as we have
					heard through the words of Gandalf, Elrond, and others, suggests
					that history may be in the hands of the little people, those who
					go unnoticed among the grander dealings of the world.

