“You cannot enter here. . . . Go back
						to the abyss prepared for you! Go back! Fall into the nothingness that
						awaits you and your Master. Go!”

The next morning, Denethor sends Faramir to protect the
					outlying ruins of Osgiliath, where Mordor’s armies are likely to
					strike first. Faramir dutifully accepts the perilous—possibly suicidal—assignment
					from his father. News arrives the following morning of a battle for
					the nearby Pelennor Fields.

The Lord of the Nazgûl, the Black Captain against whom
					none can stand, leads the armies from Mordor. Gandalf rides off
					toward Osgiliath to help fight the Black Captain. The wizard returns
					the next day, leading many wounded men. Faramir remains at Pelennor, trying
					to hold his men together to execute a safe retreat.

Not long after, the armies of Mordor approach Minas Tirith. Thousands
					of black-clad Men and Orcs stream onto the plains. A small, beleaguered
					ensemble rides before them—the last of Gondor’s rearguard in retreat.
					Lord Denethor, clad in armor, sends a small army of horsemen out
					to protect the retreat. Gandalf rides among them, using his white
					fire to deter the front lines of the Enemy. The retreating men reach
					the city safely, but one of the Nazgûl’s poisoned arrows strikes
					Faramir.

Sauron’s armies besiege the city in a vale of fire, cutting
					off all roads. They use huge catapults to lob blazing missiles into
					the first ring of the city. As the forces of Minas Tirith try to
					put these fires out, they realize to their horror that the Enemy’s
					missiles are the burning heads of those who have died defending
					Osgiliath. 

Stricken with sudden bitterness and grief, Denethor locks
					himself in the Tower with Faramir, who is now delirious with fever
					from his arrow wound. Pippin looks on as Denethor weeps, cursing
					Gandalf and bewailing the end of his lineage as Steward of Gondor.
					As Denethor is holed up, Gandalf takes over the defense of Minas Tirith.
					The army of Mordor launches an attack on the outer wall of the city.
					Denethor instructs the desperate messengers who arrive in his court
					that everyone in the city should give up and burn in the fires.

Denethor calls for his servants. He has Faramir carried
					out of the Citadel to the Hall of Kings, where Gondor’s leaders
					are laid to rest. Denethor places Faramir on a marble table and
					calls for dry wood and a torch. Pippin warns the servants not to
					obey Denethor’s orders, as it is clear that the Steward has gone
					mad. Pippin breaks the rule of the Tower Guard by leaving his post.
					He sends Beregond up to the Hall of Kings to try to intervene with
					Denethor, and then the hobbit goes in frantic search of Gandalf.

The armies of Mordor, led by the Lord of the Nazgûl, approach the
					gate of Minas Tirith with a great battering ram. The servants of the
					Enemy strike the great iron door three times. On the third strike, the
					door shatters. The Black Captain enters the first ring of the city, and
					all flee in terror before him. Pippin watches as Gandalf alone stands
					before the Black Captain. Gandalf orders the Lord of the Nazgûl
					to return to Mordor—to nothingness—but the Ringwraith laughs. He
					throws back his hood to reveal a crown on a headless body. His sword
					bursts into flame, ready to strike. Suddenly, a cock crows, and
					a great clamor of horns emanates from the north. The Riders of Rohan
					have arrived.

As some commentators have observed, one of Tolkien’s great strengths
					in The Lord of the Rings is his ability to write
					convincingly about war. Tolkien not only fought and sustained injury
					in World War I, but he also wrote his novel in
					the years surrounding World War II—a war in which Germany bombed
					the heart of England. Tolkien writes about the battle generally,
					without graphic detail and only briefly from the viewpoint of those
					actually fighting. As such, his descriptions of war maintain a refreshing
					sense of perspective. “The Siege of Gondor” is narrated in the usual
					third person, but it is limited to the perspective of the chapter’s
					only hobbit, Pippin. We are not occupied with Pippin’s thoughts
					and emotions; the only information available to us is that which
					Pippin overhears in Denethor’s court, discusses with Gandalf, or
					observes as might a citizen of Minas Tirith. From this perspective,
					we watch from afar as retreating men stumble frantically for the
					city gates, their pursuers close behind. We learn in horror, alongside
					the occupants of Minas Tirith, that the Enemy’s firebombs are not
					actually bombs, but human heads. This restricted knowledge of events
					increases our sense of suspense and fear. Tolkien’s account seems
					realistic, for it depicts war against the backdrop of the human
					city. 

Recalling the image of Nero fiddling as Rome burned, Dene-thor’s
					actions in the midst of impending doom reveal much about his character.
					While a war for the freedom of Middle-earth rages outside Gondor’s
					walls, Denethor turns his attention inward, locking himself in the
					Citadel and mourning his own demise. Denethor desires complete power
					or none at all; with the destruction of Minas Tirith seemingly at
					hand, he feels he must exert control over the only things he is
					still able to control—his and Faramir’s lives. Denethor believes
					that he would have safely hidden the Ring had Boromir procured it
					for him. Gandalf, however, notes that Denethor, like Boromir, would
					have coveted and used the Ring for himself. In truth, Denethor appears
					to want to use the power of the Ring to return glory to Gondor.
					Denethor’s desire for the Ring leads to his descent into madness,
					paranoia, and insecurity. As critic Rose Zimbardo notes, the Ring’s
					wicked effect on individuals in The Lord of the Rings is
					a loss of personal identity. Just as those who wear the Ring become
					invisible, so those who focus their energies on obtaining the Ring
					lose their sense of self in the overwhelming desire to harness power
					to control others.

