David Malter visits Reuven again and tells
					him Dr. Snydman will examine his eye on Friday morning. Afterward,
					Reuven probably will be able to come home. Reuven tells his father
					about Danny’s last visit and comments that the way Danny looks does
					not match the way he speaks. Danny dresses like a Hasid, he says,
					but talks about Ivanhoe and Freud. Reuven’s father
					encourages him to befriend Danny, citing a Talmudic maxim that stresses
					the importance of choosing a friend for oneself. He also says, “A
					Greek philosopher said that two people who are true friends are
					like two bodies with one soul.”	After Mr. Malter leaves, Mr. Savo warns
					Reuven to beware of fanatics like Danny. Reuven wakes up in the
					middle of the night and is concerned to see a curtain around Mr.
					Savo’s bed. The curtain is still up the next morning, and Reuven
					hears bustling activity and soft moaning from Mr. Savo’s bed. In
					the early evening, Danny comes to visit for a third time. Reuven
					is excited by Danny’s visit but worried about Mr. Savo, so he suggests
					they go into the hall to talk.

	Reuven and Danny have a long conversation about their
					intellectual interests and their aspirations for the future. They
					discover that they were both born in the same place, Brooklyn Memorial
					Hospital, where Reuven is currently staying. Danny elaborates on
					his father’s belief in silence, saying that his father never speaks
					to him except when they are studying Torah and Talmud. Danny also
					confesses that even though his father tells him man’s mission in
					life is to obey God, sometimes he is not sure what God wants. Danny
					knows that he is expected to take his father’s place as head of
					the Hasidic dynasty, but he is not sure he wants to do so. 

Reuven is surprised by Danny’s confession and even more shocked
					when Danny reveals that he reads seven or eight non-religious books
					a week, including writings by authors like the evolutionists Darwin
					and T. H. Huxley, of whom Reb Saunders would not approve. Danny
					tells Reuven that a nice man in the library recommends books for
					him to read. Reuven tells Danny he doesn’t know what to make of
					him, saying, “You look like a Hasid, but you don’t sound like one.” 

After a silence, Reuven tells Danny about his love for
					mathematics. Danny knows little about math, and he is excited that
					Reuven knows so much about a subject he knows nothing about. In
					the middle of their conversation, Reuven’s father comes to visit,
					and both boys are astonished to learn that Mr. Malter is the man
					who has been recommending books to Danny in the library. Reuven
					is stunned and a little hurt that his father said nothing to him
					about this activity, but David Malter explains that he was only
					trying to respect Danny’s privacy. After recovering from his initial
					shock, Danny thanks Mr. Malter for all his reading recommendations
					and promises to visit Reuven on Saturday afternoon, after he is
					home from the hospital.

	When Reuven wakes up on Friday morning, the
					curtain is no longer drawn around Mr. Savo’s bed, but Billy’s bed
					is now empty. Mr. Savo tells Reuven that Billy is undergoing the
					operation to restore his sight. Reuven prays for Billy and then
					nervously goes to have his examination with Dr. Snydman. The doctor
					examines Reuven and tells him that he thinks the scar tissue will
					heal correctly. Reuven is very excited to return home, and he says
					goodbye to Mr. Savo. Before he leaves, he learns that Mr. Savo’s
					bad eye had to be removed.

Like Chapter 3, Chapter 4 contains
					many scenes that do not directly relate to the novel’s main story
					about the relationship between Reuven and Danny. Potok details Reuven’s
					reaction to Mr. Savo’s surgery, and he emphasizes Billy Merrit’s
					surgery. The chapter ends with the news that Mr. Savo has to have
					his eye removed, a revelation that reminds Reuven and us of the
					presence of suffering, especially undeserved or needless suffering.
					We pity Mr. Savo and Billy because their injuries are horrible and
					arose through no fault of their own. Potok intersperses examples
					of needless, random suffering throughout the novel to reinforce
					suffering as a fundamental, ever-present aspect of human existence.

	Over the course of Reuven and Danny’s long
					conversation, we see that the two boys have much in common. They
					share a ravenous intellectual curiosity, they both study Talmud
					diligently, they both evidence a deep commitment to and respect
					for Jewish tradition, they are both taught by David Malter, and
					they were even born in the same hospital. More important, we see
					how they complement each other: Danny is interested in science and
					the humanities, while Reuven’s strength is in mathematics. Danny
					is delighted to learn that Reuven knows so much about a subject with
					which he is unfamiliar because he sees that Reuven is an intellectual
					equal who can teach him about things he cannot learn on his own.
					Throughout The Chosen, all the characters hunger
					for knowledge, and Danny’s excitement over Reuven’s ability to teach
					him foreshadows the mutually beneficial role the boys will play
					in each other’s life. Each will teach and be taught by the other.

	The epigraph of Book One of The Chosen is
					a quotation from Proverbs. It reads, “I was a son to my father.
					. . . And he taught me and said to me, ‘Let your heart hold fast
					my words. . . .’” This quotation emphasizes the importance of teaching
					imparted by a father to a son, and it is in his relationship to
					his father that Reuven’s situation differs most strikingly from
					Danny’s. Whereas Reuven’s father speaks to Reuven freely about all
					subjects, Reb Saunders only teaches Danny about Jewish law and custom.
					Reb Saunders attempts to restrict his son’s education to Hasidic
					customs and precepts, reflecting a small-minded and limited worldview
					in which such topics are the only ones worth learning.

Reb Saunders’s silence seems unusually cruel
					and inexplicable, and his lack of non-liturgical interaction seems
					to imply a fundamental distance or coldness in his relationship
					with Danny. But in this chapter, Potok hints that silence doesn’t
					always imply coldness and distance when, after Danny reveals his
					doubts about God’s will and Reuven responds, the two boys “[sit]
					in silence a long time. It was a warm silence, though, not in the
					least bit awkward.” This brief passage foreshadows the multifaceted role
					silence plays later in the novel.

	When Reuven says to Danny, “You look like a Hasid, but
					you don’t sound like one,” he shows that one’s senses can contradict
					and complement one another, each offering insight into the world
					that the others lack. Although Reuven’s eye heals completely, his
					experience in the hospital teaches him how fragile his vision is,
					both literally (in terms of the injury to his eye) and figuratively
					(in terms of his misperceptions about Danny). By listening to Danny,
					Reuven learns aspects of his friend that his eyes could never see.

