Dressed fashionably, and with their pockets full of money,
					Alex and his new droogs—Len, Rick, and Bully—sit at the Korova Milkbar, drinking
					milk laced with stimulants, and trying to figure out what to do
					with the night. Alex describes the teenager’s new uniforms, which
					have gone from the tight-fitting shirts and pants of Alex’s younger
					days to wide trousers and loose leather jerkins. Alex also summarizes
					the dynamics of his new gang. As the oldest and the most famous,
					with the best job (at the National Gramodisc Archives), Alex is
					once again the natural leader, though he occasionally suspects Bully
					of harboring mutinous ambitions. This doesn’t seem to trouble him
					too much, though, because lately Alex has become bored by the routine
					of theft and gang violence. 

When Alex feels the drugs kick in, he punches a neighboring patron
					in the stomach and leads his droogs into the street, where they
					come upon an old man buying a newspaper. Alex sanctions Bully’s
					assault on the old man, and the other two soon join in, tripping
					and kicking the man until he crawls away, whimpering. Alex then
					gives the boys permission to head over to the Duke, where they sit
					across from the same women Alex met there in Part One. The women
					praise the boys, hoping for a drink in return, but Alex gets annoyed
					and forbids it at first, noting to us that he has become frugal.
					Alex eventually concedes to buying the women another round, and,
					uncharacteristically, gets himself a beer. As he pulls out his money,
					a newspaper clipping falls out of Alex’s pocket, which Bully snatches
					up. On it is a photograph of a baby. The group has a bit of fun
					with Alex’s apparent sentimentality until Alex snarls at them and
					rips the picture up, letting it drop to the floor. To the group’s puzzlement,
					he goes on to chastise them, calling them babies because they take
					advantage of the helpless.

Not feeling himself, Alex leaves the others and goes out
					to roam the desolate streets. During his walk, Alex comments on
					how this recent malaise even finds its way into his taste of music.
					He doesn’t enjoy great, crashing symphonies anymore, preferring
					instead to listen to lieder—very spare, operatic
					love songs in German. 

Alex is alone in a cafe when he runs into Pete, one of
					his old droogs. He learns that Pete got married at nineteen years
					old. With his life as a droog entirely behind him, he and his wife
					Georgina both work and barely manage to scrape by with meager incomes.
					Listening to Pete, Alex finds himself amazed at how Pete has grown.
					Listening to Alex, Georgina giggles at his funny way of speaking. 

Pete and Georgina leave Alex, who continues to sit in
					the café, lost in thought. Alex considers himself at the ripe age
					of eighteen, comparing himself to historic figures who were geniuses
					in their youth—Mozart writing concertos, Felix Mendelssohn scoring Shakespeare
					to ballet, Arthur Rimbaud composing his greatest poetry by age fifteen—and
					wondering what he, in turn, will amount to. Back out on the cold
					streets, Alex answers his own question with visions of himself,
					married and with a son of his own. He likes this idea, because to
					him it means he’s growing up. Alex reflects on youth, which he compares
					to wind-up toys that just advance in straight lines until they run
					up against obstacles. He thinks of his future son in this way, too,
					because he doesn’t expect his son to listen to any of the lessons
					Alex has to teach him. According to Alex, that’s the nature of life,
					and youth will always have to suffer its own mistakes, just as Alex
					has. At this point, Alex realizes he’s no longer young.

In his introduction to the 1986 American edition of A
						Clockwork Orange, Burgess writes that “there is, in fact,
					not much point in writing a novel unless you can show the possibility
					of moral transformation, or an increase in wisdom, operating in
					your chief character or characters.” Burgess refers here to the
					twenty-first and final chapter, in which Alex begins to feel older
					and grow weary of violence. The chapter number is significant, twenty-one
					being the age where a person attains legal maturity. Burgess’s American
					publishers didn’t approve of the twenty-first chapter, and excised
					it in favor of the more dramatic, jarring twentieth chapter. But
					this last chapter is essential to Burgess, because it fleshes out
					how patterns of life function in relation to an individual’s moral
					growth. 

Alex’s insistence on formal and structural motifs in his
					narrative draws attention to his reinstatement as someone capable
					of and predisposed to viciousness, while simultaneously alerting
					us to the transformation his character undergoes. Alex looks the
					part and speaks the part, but these days he shies away from acting
					the part, as he suggests to us while Bully and the others beat an
					old man: “More and more these days I had been just giving the orders
					and standing back to viddy them being carried out.” The rhythmic
					intensity of the language Alex uses to describe the ensuing violence
					pales in comparison to Alex’s earlier accounts of poundings given
					by his old droogs. Indeed, its vigor seems all but gone as his fondness
					for violence fades. 

Alex’s nadsat returns with full strength
					during his meditations on the prospect of fatherhood and the likelihood
					of him making the same mistakes as his father: “And so it would
					itty on to like the end of the world, round and round and round,
					like some bolshy gigantic like chelloveck, like old Bog Himself
					(by courtesy of Korova Milkbar) turning and turning and turning
					a vonny grahzny orange in his gigantic rookers.” This passage demonstrates
					Alex’s recognizably Christian conception of life as a cyclical pattern,
					with original sin eventually being followed by redemption. Upon
					realizing this concept of moral and spiritual growth, Alex finally
					answers the question he asks himself in the beginning of this chapter:
					“What’s it going to be then, eh?” Alex is now mature enough to understand
					the connection between violence and youth, the latter of which he
					compares to clockwork wind-up toys that move forward, unrelentingly and
					unthinkingly, in straight lines. Earlier in his life, violence has served
					as an affirmation of Alex’s free will, but as he grows older, Alex
					realizes that only through suffering can he truly be capable of making
					meaningful moral choices. 

