Inman’s character reflects a conflict between moral precepts
				and the horrific realities of life. When the novel opens, Inman
				is wounded and psychologically scarred by memories of war. The ghosts
				of dead soldiers haunt his dreams at night and thoughts of Ada fill
				his days. Despite his crippled psyche, Inman remains an honorable
				and heroic man. Throughout the novel, Inman’s conscience guides
				his actions. Although he is troubled by the deaths he has witnessed
				and doesn’t wish to add to them, Inman is willing to resort to violence
				if necessary. Frazier characterizes his protagonist as a warrior equipped
				to fight moral and physical battles. 

As a figure assaulted by evil forces, Inman justifies
				aggressive means in the name of protecting innocent people, himself
				included.  Consequently, Inman’s journey is ideological as well
				as geographical. Inman reconsiders his spiritual ideas in light
				of the physical danger and suffering he encounters while traveling.
				Inman’s travel book, Bartram’s Travels, is a spiritual
				and topographical guide—it inspires Inman with idealized visions
				of home and directs him towards that home. Inman consults the book
				for spiritual sustenance and for escapist entertainment. Frazier
				fills Inman’s journey with shades of deeper meaning, suggesting
				that his physical travails mirror a more profound spiritual struggle.

	Inman recalls and reinterprets past events as part of
				his process of spiritual awakening. In particular, he remembers
				Cherokee folktales and envisions a world located beyond the terrestrial
				realm. Inman needs this kind of comfort, for, as he delves deeper
				into the mountains, he becomes better acquainted with man’s capacity
				for both good and evil. Following his encounters with Junior and
				his near-death experience, Inman’s faith in himself falters. However,
				his faith in a better world does not. Frazier suggests that Sara’s
				and the goat-woman’s bravery also bolster Inman’s resolve. Inman
				preserves his humanity under the weight of intense psychological
				strain because he believes in a distant and better reality.

	Inman’s name (we never learn his first name) suggests
				that he is a self-reflective man, alone in the thrall of forces
				greater than his own will. Inman cannot direct what happens to him,
				so he seeks a measure of control by inwardly questioning his past
				and speculating about his future. While it would be too simplistic
				to state that Inman finds himself in Ada, he clearly identifies
				in her the kind of life he wants to live—a life of peace, stability,
				and affection. Thus Inman grows from a tortured and disillusioned
				man into a calmer, more self-aware individual. Indeed, after a journey
				fraught with suffering and spiritual turmoil, Inman is temporarily
				redeemed by love. Ultimately, however, Frazier suggests that Inman’s
				true redemption—an escape from the world with which he has become
				so disillusioned—can only be attained through death.

