Prince Genji 

The novel’s main character and hero. Genji, or Hiraku Genji, is the beautiful son of the Emperor and Lady Kiri-Tsubo. He is a charming and talented young man, who acquires friends and lovers with ease, but whose gifts also inspire jealousy. He is a gifted poet, musician, and dancer. He is clever and impulsive, especially in love. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Genji

The Emperor 

Genji’s father and the first of three emperors featured in the opening seventeen chapters of The Tale of Genji. There are three emperors in the first seventeen chapters: Genji’s father, the son of Lady Koki-den, and the son of Genji and Princess Wistaria (known in court as the son of the first emperor). 

Kiri-Tsubo 

Genji's mother and the Emperor’s lover. Kiri-Tsubo is beautiful and accomplished, but she does not have important family connections. She suffers from the attacks of jealous people at court, so profoundly, in fact, that she dies in the book’s first chapter.  

Lady Koki-den 

The mother of the Heir Apparent and the daughter of U-Daijin, the Minister of the Right. Jealous and politically savvy, she wields a great deal of power, showing how women could be political forces in this era, despite norms that kept them out of sight. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Lady Koki-den 

Lady Aoi 

Genji’s first wife. The marriage between Lady Aoi and Genji is arranged when he is twelve and is intended to enhance his court status. The bond between the couple is not a close one. She is characterized by a cold reserve, exacerbated by her husband’s romantic exploits. 

Princess Wistaria 

The Emperor’s lover after the death of Kiri-Tsubo. Princess Wisteria bears a striking resemblance to Genji’s mother, both in terms of her physical appearance and her gentle demeanor; she differs from her, though, in having powerful family connections. Genji and his father both are drawn to her. 

Violet 

A timid ten-year-old girl who resembles Princess Wistaria. Genji sees her and decides he must adopt her, so, when permission is repeatedly withheld, he kidnaps her. He devotes time and energy to her education and eventually initiates a sexual relationship with her (in the book, their relationship is not presented as particularly problematic, but modern readers will no doubt find it extremely troubling due to Violet's age). Violet lacks powerful relatives and thus cannot be Genji’s wife after the death of Lady Aoi.  

Read an in-depth analysis of Violet

Tō-no-Chūjō 

Son of Sa-Daijin, Lady Aoi’s brother, and Genji’s closest friend. Tō-no-Chūjō is an accomplished and attractive man, but cannot compete with Genji. While their friendship is occasionally strained, he defies Lady Koki-den and visits Genji in exile. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Tō-no-Chūjō

Cicada 

A married woman Genji pursues unsuccessfully. Modest and restrained, Cicada is described as having a distinct charm although she is not classically beautiful. She and Genji exchange poems, in which she admits an attraction to him, but she is consistent in her refusal of his attentions. 

Kokimi  

An orphan hoping to enter court service and the brother of Cicada. Genji takes Kokimi, an alert and ambitious youth, under his wing. 

Koremitsu 

The son Genji’s nurse. He is prompt in his efforts on Genji’s behalf and has a temperament suited to intrigue. 

The Lady Rokujō 

An older woman of high standing whom Genji woos with difficulty. She is jealous of his interests in other women once they are entwined, however, and is twice associated with spirit possession. 

Yūgao 

A modest, simple, and dignified woman. She has a quiet charm that appeals to Genji. Yūgao, or more obliquely “Evening Glory,” was previously Tō-no-Chūjō’s lover and he is the father of her child. He complains about her in the second chapter as being too timid. 

Princess Hitachi 

A beautiful woman Genji pursues, deficient in poetic and musical skills. She must rely on the intervention of servants and attendants to hide her limitations. Even though Genji loses interest in her, she waits longingly for his return. 

Naishi-no-Kami 

Lady Koki-den’s sister and daughter of U-Daijin. She is skilled in the ways of the court and less retiring than some of the other women Genji pursues. 

Sama-no-Kami 

One of Genji’s friends and a doctor of literature. Sama-no-Kami discourses, sometimes pompously, about art and women. 

Shikibu-no-Jō 

One of Genji’s friends and the Secretary to the Master of Ceremonies in the imperial court. He participates in the debate about women and tells the story of the erudite woman. 

Ki-no-Kami 

A friend of Genji. Genji visits his house and tries to begin a romantic liaison with his stepmother, Cicada. 

The Akashi Lady 

Genji’s mistress in Akashi, raised by her father to be a fit companion to a prince. 

The Akashi Priest 

A priest, related to Genji’s mother, who was previously the governor of Akashi. His main interest is his daughter, whom he hopes to see rise in the social ladder. 

U-Daijin 

The Minister of the Right and father of Lady Koki-Den. His family has a great deal of power, which is augmented when Sa-Daijin decides to retreat from public life. 

Sa-Daijin 

Genji’s father-in-law and the Minister of the Left. Even though Genji pays little attention to Lady Aoi, his father-in-law is fond of him. 

Naishi-no-Suke 

An older woman, still coquettish. Also known as Gen-Naishi-no-Suke, this clever woman attracts Genji’s attention. 

Shō-nagon 

Violet’s attendant. 

Chujō 

A female attendant in the house of Ki-no-Kami, who waits on Cicada. 

Ukon 

Yūgao’s attendant. 

Daini 

Prince Genji’s nurse.  

