Percy feels overwhelmed by his new home and everything he is learning as he continues to wonder who his father is. Annabeth tells him that although he may never know, it is important that he remain at the camp in order to protect himself from monsters and mortals. The camp’s border does not allow monsters or mortals to enter unless summoned by someone within the camp. If he were to stay in the mortal world, he would be more susceptible to danger. Annabeth explains that Percy is only allowed to leave the camp with permission or if assigned to a quest. 

Percy asks Annabeth what she knows about the summer solstice. She only recalls an unease with the weather after her trip to Mount Olympus for the winter solstice with Clarisse and Luke. She also overheard talk about something that was stolen and if the item was not returned by the summer solstice, a war would break out. Percy and Annabeth return to their cabins where Percy chats with Luke. Luke tells Percy that although Annabeth desperately wants to go on a quest, she is unable to until somebody special arrives. Percy does not understand what Luke means but drops the conversation.

As Percy settles into the camp, he discovers his skill in sword fighting, his gift with water, and his father’s identity. During a sword-fighting lesson with Luke, Percy successfully beats him, which catches Luke off guard. Later, Percy asks Grover about Grover’s desire for a searcher’s license. Grover does not share much detail other than how he may be one step closer if he successfully protects Percy during a quest. They also talk about the “Big Three” gods: Zeus, Poseidon, and Hades. 

Grover explains that the children of the “Big Three” gods are more powerful than other half-bloods. Because of this, the “Big Three” decided not to have any more children after they recognized that their children were causing catastrophic events. Zeus, however, broke this pact by having a daughter named Thalia. Hades was angered at Zeus for his indiscretion and sent monsters to attack Thalia. She sacrificed herself by fighting the monsters alone to save other half-bloods and a satyr who were accompanying her on their way to Camp Half-Blood. As Thalia was dying, Zeus turned her into a pine tree. Through this tree, now called Half-Blood Hill for her heroic act, Thalia’s spirit still protects the surrounding borders. 

In the evening, during a game of capture the flag, Percy is attacked by Clarisse and several other campers, leaving a deep wound in his arm. Percy falls back into a creek and, even though he is weak, he is mysteriously able to defend himself against his opponents. Meanwhile, Luke wins the game for his cabin. Annabeth magically appears near Percy in the creek after taking off her invisibility cap. As they are getting out of the water, Annabeth notices that Percy’s arm has already healed. Suddenly, a hellhound from the Fields of Punishment attacks Percy, but is promptly killed by arrows fired by Chiron, piercing its neck. Chiron trots over and points out that someone from inside the camp must have summoned a monster to attack Percy. As Percy resubmerges into the water to heal, a hologram of green light shines above him and reveals that Poseidon has claimed Percy as his son.

Part of Percy adjusting to Camp Half-Blood means crafting a new perception of himself. Percy struggles with this even more while trying to come to terms with what his purpose in his new life will be. In the past, his life as a somewhat normal boy left him feeling confused, and he never felt like he fit in. Even though being around a group of demigods makes him feel even more out of place as he still cannot relate to his peers, learning that he is a half-blood also gives him a new sense of confidence, or at least the beginnings of one. Everything he once considered a “flaw,” like his dyslexia, turns into a strength. This realization is the start of his journey to self-awareness and self-acceptance.

Knowing who his father is complicates Percy’s thoughts about his identity even further and makes it difficult to acclimate to his new reality. Other characters shape their entire identities around their lineage. Percy demonstrates loyalty, creativity, and strength even before he knows he’s the son of a god known for these qualities, raising the question of how much of his personality can be attributed to Poseidon and how much of it is just who he is. In contrast to Percy and unlike many of the other campers, Luke knows who his father is. However, while Luke may know the identity of his father, he lacks motivation and doesn’t feel the same personal responsibility for his life that Percy does. Instead, Luke shows resentment towards his father and the gods in general. This will play into the theme of identity in a major way later on in the novel. 

Percy begins to reconcile his teenage identity struggles with the need to step up to challenges in the face of approaching conflict. He begins to understand that forces are working against him, chiefly Zeus and Hades. By virtue of being Poseidon’s son, he is a target for the other two of the Big Three just as Thalia was before him, trapping him in a conflict more monumental than anything he has experienced thus far. In order to succeed, Percy will need to develop more confidence in his abilities. Frequent mentions of the summer solstice, an event of significance in both myth and religion, hint that Percy will soon be part of something important. The revelation that he has more strength than other half-bloods sets Percy apart as he begins his transformation into a hero.

