Harry reports to Dumbledore’s office. Dumbledore explains
					that he is going to teach Harry more about Lord Voldemort and hopes
					this information will ultimately help Harry survive. They gather
					around the Pensieve, a shallow stone basin that allows its users
					to experience the memories of others. Dumbledore takes a small vial
					of memory from his robe and tells Harry that they are going to view
					one of Bob Ogden’s memories. Ogden worked for the Department of
					Magical Law Enforcement. Suddenly, Harry and Dumbledore are standing
					in a country lane, watching a plump man in glasses read a wooden
					signpost. Ogden cautiously approaches a house. As Ogden nears the
					house, Harry hears a voice speaking Parseltongue, the ancient language
					of snakes, telling Ogden he is not welcome. The voice, coming from
					Morfin, a man in rags, moves closer and jinxes Ogden. Suddenly,
					another man rushes out of the cabin—it is Morfin’s father, Gaunt.
					Ogden tells the men that he is here to investigate Morfin’s use
					of magic on a Muggle.

Ogden meets Gaunt’s daughter, Merope. Ogden presents a
					summons to the Ministry for a hearing, and Gaunt reacts with rage,
					first showing Ogden his ugly gold ring with a black stone, then
					dragging Merope toward Ogden by the locket hanging around her neck. Gaunt
					shows Ogden the symbol on the locket, explaining that they are the
					last living descendents of Salazar Slytherin. Gaunt admits that
					his son performed a jinx on a Muggle, and Morfin accuses Merope
					of being in love with the Muggle boy, Tom, whom he jinxed. Gaunt
					erupts into anger, screaming at Merope with disgust and attempting
					to strangle her, which Ogden prevents using magic. Morfin hops up,
					wielding a knife and his wand, and Ogden flees the house.

Dumbledore and Harry return to Hogwarts. Dumbledore tells Harry
					that Ogden Apparated back to the Ministry and returned with reinforcements.
					Morfin and Gaunt were arrested and sentenced to time in Azkaban—six
					months for Gaunt and three years for Morfin. Gaunt’s first name,
					Dumbledore explains, was Marvolo, which Harry recognizes as the
					name of Voldemort’s grandfather. Harry concludes that Merope must
					be Voldemort’s mother. Voldemort’s father, Dumbledore continues,
					was Tom, the Muggle boy Morfin jinxed. Merope used a love option
					on Tom, and when Marvolo returned from Azkaban he would not speak
					to or acknowledge his Muggle-loving daughter. Within a few months
					of their marriage, Tom returned to his Muggle village, presumably after
					Merope’s love potion wore off. Meanwhile, Merope was pregnant with
					Voldemort. Harry asks Dumbledore if it is acceptable for him to
					share this information with Ron and Hermione, and Dumbledore gives
					his permission.

On his way out, Harry notices the black and gold ring,
					the same ring Marvolo showed Ogden and that Dumbledore was wearing when
					he collected Harry from the Dursleys. Dumbledore tells Harry he
					acquired it recently, around the same time he injured his hand. Hermione
					notices that Dumbledore’s seat in the Great Hall has been empty
					frequently. At Quidditch tryouts, Harry picks Ron as Keeper, despite
					his inconsistent performance history. After tryouts, Harry, Ron,
					and Hermione head down to Hagrid’s cabin. Hagrid is angry with the
					students for not taking his class, but he finally forgives them when
					Hermione offers to go with Hagrid to visit his giant spider friend,
					Aragog, in the forest. Hagrid declines, claiming that the rest of
					the tribe would eat any visitor other than Hagrid, but he is cheered
					by the offer. Professor Slughorn invites Harry and Hermione to a
					small party for his favorite students in his room. Harry declines
					because he has to make up a detention with Snape, but Hermione agrees
					to attend.

When Dumbledore invites Harry into the Pensieve, he is
					granting Harry exclusive access to Voldemort’s childhood in the
					hopes that Harry will better understand Voldemort’s habits and tendencies
					and eventually be able to use that information to destroy Voldemort
					forever. In their first trip into the Pensieve, Harry witnesses
					the Gaunts, a despicable family obsessed with their Pureblood Slytherin
					lineage and with maintaining a Mud-free line. The Gaunts treat each
					other very badly and extend their lack of goodwill to their neighbors. Clearly,
					Marvolo and Morfin are at war with the Muggle families living nearby
					and can think of nothing worse than Merope falling in love with
					a Muggle man. Marvolo and Morfin finally end up in Azkaban thanks
					to the intervention of the Ministry, but Harry is surprised to find
					himself feeling almost sympathetic toward Voldemort’s mother, Merope,
					who was forced to endure constant abuse from her father and brother.
					Merope falls in love with a Muggle man, and it seems possible that
					her feelings are as much a result of wanting to escape her terrible
					family as anything else. Merope may have a crush on Tom, but her
					desires are certainly rooted in a desire to betray and anger her
					terrible relatives. Because Tom has no reason to reciprocate her
					feelings, Merope is forced to administer a love potion, and when
					it wears off, she’s left pregnant and alone. We can sympathize with
					Merope’s plight, despite her terrible father and brother.

Rowling continues to underscore the importance of friendship. Dumbledore
					agrees that it would be wise for Harry to share the new information
					about Voldemort with Ron and Hermione, suggesting the necessity
					of collaborative thinking and action. At Quidditch tryouts, Harry
					picks Ron as Gryffindor Keeper, even though he knows that Ron is
					an extremely inconsistent player. Still, Harry would rather protect
					the feelings of his best friend that choose a Keeper who may perform
					more reliably. Luckily for Harry, Ron performs quite well at tryouts,
					so Harry’s moral dilemma dissipates. Later, Hagrid also calls on
					his young friends for their loyalty and support. Even though Ron
					and Harry are horrified by the prospect of visiting Aragog, Hagrid’s
					giant spider-friend, Hermione offers to accompany Hagrid, which
					makes him feel loved and cared for. He turns down their offer, but
					Hermione’s willingness to make the trip was more than enough to
					satisfy Hagrid’s desire for friendship and support.

Dumbledore’s seat in the Great Hall is often empty, and
					it’s difficult for the student body of Hogwarts to see that their
					headmaster is not there for them when they need him the most. Harry
					considers Dumbledore a father figure, and most of Hogwarts feels
					similarly. Given the troubling conditions of the time, with Death
					Eaters striking innocent victims and people constantly being placed
					under the Imperius Curse, it is important for the students to feel
					as though they are being protected and watched over by a wizard
					as old and as powerful as Dumbledore. Unfortunately, Dumbledore
					has said nothing about where he goes in his absences, and the students
					are left feeling abandoned and unimportant. Throughout Harry’s tenure
					at Hogwarts, there have been many times when the school has threatened
					to close because of unsafe conditions, and it has always been Dumbledore’s
					role to comfort parents and ensure them of their children’s safety.
					With Dumbledore gone, there is little reason for either students
					or their parents to feel secure. Harry, like most students, feels
					vaguely betrayed by Dumbledore’s empty chair, finding it difficult
					to imagine what might be more important than guarding Hogwarts.

