Ida’s mother dies. Lecon runs off a month later and Pauline
					marries Dale Cree. Ida leases her land and installs electricity
					and plumbing in her house. Around this time, Willard Pretty Dog
					returns from the war. Willard Pretty Dog was once the most attractive
					boy on the reservation, and was conceited and vain about his appearance.
					During the war, however, he stumbled on a land mine in Italy, and
					is now rumored to be hideously deformed. Willard has even gone so
					far as to paint the windows of his car so no one can see him as
					he makes his frequent trips to the hospital. Ida asks Father Hurlburt
					about Willard, and he says Ida should pay Willard a visit. Willard
					is so ashamed of his appearance that Father Hurlburt knows he will never
					see anyone at his house, but thinks he might be able to persuade
					Willard to stop by Ida’s on the way back from the hospital.

	Father Hurlburt says he will stop by with Willard the
					next Thursday. The night before, Ida turns on her radio and takes
					a relaxing bath. The day of Willard’s visit, Ida has Pauline take
					her to the store, where she spends an excessive amount of money
					on groceries. Ida prepares dinner and puts Christine to bed. When
					Father Hurlburt arrives, Ida can hear him trying to coax Willard
					from the car. Ida goes outside and without even looking at Willard
					drags him inside her house. Once there, Willard settles down slightly.
					Father Hurlburt leaves and Ida tells Willard he looks better than
					she had expected him to. Willard disdainfully asks what Ida knows
					about anything, so Ida tells him her whole story. That night they
					go to bed together.

	Willard begins to live with Ida. Pauline wonders what
					other people will think about Ida and Willard’s relationship. Ida
					denies she is sleeping with Willard, even though she clearly is.
					Father Hurlburt does not condemn Ida when he makes his next weekly
					visit, and Willard joins in on their customary conversation. Three
					months later, Willard’s mother stops by Ida’s house and says that
					she has heard unconfirmed rumors about her son and Ida. Mrs. Pretty
					Dog acts as if Ida is Willard’s nurse, although it is clear she
					understands that Ida and Willard are romantically involved.

	Willard goes back to the hospital for more reconstructive
					surgery. While Willard is away, Father Hurlburt stops by Ida’s house
					to tell her that Lecon is dead. Soon afterward, Ida realizes she
					is pregnant. Although she embraces the idea of being pregnant, she
					keeps it secret and plans to use the news to boost Willard’s happiness
					if the operation goes well, or to console him if it does not. Ida
					rides with Father Hurlburt and Mrs. Pretty Dog to the hospital.
					When the doctor removes Willard’s bandages, everyone is surprised
					to see that he is nearly as handsome as he was in high school. Mrs.
					Pretty Dog assumes that Willard will no longer need his “nurse,”
					but Willard says he will be going back to Ida’s anyway, and that
					it is time his mother understood that Ida is more than his nurse.
					Mrs. Pretty Dog argues that Willard can have any girl he wants now.
					Willard remains firm, saying that even though Ida may not be beautiful
					or smart, he wants to stay with her because she stood by him. When
					Ida hears Willard’s words, however, she does not appreciate the
					less than flattering portrait he paints of her. By the time Willard
					is finished, Ida no longer wants him, and refuses the charity of
					his presence.

	When people begin to imply that Willard must be the father
					of Ida’s yet unborn child, Ida sarcastically implies how unlikely
					that would be. She never denies it outright, nor does she deny any
					other speculations as to the identity of her child’s father. The
					only denial Ida makes comes when Pauline asks if Father Hurlburt
					is the child’s father. Ida still associates with Willard, but she
					no longer feigns ignorance or stupidity. She wants to show Christine
					that it is all right to act strong in front of a man. When Ida tells
					Christine about the baby, Christine wants to know what its name
					will be. Pauline wants Ida to name the child after their parents,
					but Ida does not like that idea. However, when the baby—a boy—is
					born, Ida does name him Lecon, which she then abbreviates to Lee.
					From the day of his birth, everyone can tell that Lee is a beautiful
					child.




Ida tells her story to Willard Pretty Dog but alters it.
					This alteration strips Ida’s confession of the therapeutic effect
					Rayona feels when she confesses to Evelyn. In speaking with Evelyn,
					Rayona takes a step into real life for the first time in months.
					Afterward, Rayona no longer has the weight of a lie upon her, and
					thus feels relieved. Ida, however, tells her story to Willard because
					she wants to prove to him that she knows about suffering, and that
					his exaggerated self-pity is unmerited. In order to do so, Ida needs
					to show Willard that they have some common ground, so in her story
					she constructs an image of herself to please Willard. Though Ida’s
					suffering has been real, she adds to her facade several attributes
					that are not true to her personality and pretends to be stupid and
					ignorant in an attempt to massage Willard’s ego. Unlike Rayona’s
					confession, therefore, Ida’s talk with Willard actually takes her
					a step further into a life controlled by others.

	It is only after Ida realizes she no longer wants Willard
					and is no longer concerned with pleasing him that she begins to
					act like her real self again. Ida’s self-assertiveness is one of
					her lasting legacies to her family. After debasing herself to please
					Willard, Ida becomes determined to show Christine that it is acceptable
					to be smart when men are around. Both Christine and Rayona adapt
					Ida’s advice and refuse to act stupid to please anyone. In fact,
					it is Christine’s and Rayona’s fiercely independent streaks that
					get them into trouble more often than anything else.

	The people Ida is closest to react in varied ways to
					her affair with Willard, and their reactions are often the opposite
					of what we might expect. Pauline is judgmental and worries about
					what other people will think; it appears that some of Lecon’s fixation
					on appearances has rubbed off on Pauline. Father Hurlburt, on the
					other hand, does not judge Ida when he learns that Willard has been
					living with her. Since both Pauline and Father Hurlburt are strongly
					connected to the church, we expect them to hold similar positions
					on Ida’s life, but they actually hold almost contradictory opinions.
					Both see pros and cons in Ida’s relationship with Willard, but Pauline
					is more concerned with the relationship’s appearance of impropriety,
					whereas Father Hurlburt sees the positive effect of the relationship
					on Ida’s well being. Father Hurlburt knows Ida and understands her,
					and he recognizes how badly she needs companionship. Although we expect
					Father Hurlburt to take a very moralizing stance, his sense of friendship
					allows him to set aside religious dogma and rules when he realizes
					Ida’s relationship is doing her good.

	Ida learns she is pregnant immediately after learning
					of Lecon’s death, which can be read as a sign of the end of one
					era and the beginning of another. We have already seen this coincidence
					with Rayona’s birth, which occurs the same day Christine learns
					that Lee has been killed in Vietnam. Indeed, throughout the novel
					we see this pattern of life following death. Lecon’s death is a
					symbolic end to Ida’s parents’ generation and releases Ida from
					the confines of secrecy that her family has imposed on her. Likewise,
					Lee’s birth represents the advent of a new generation and of a new
					set of responsibilities for Ida. With Lecon’s death, Ida no longer
					has to take care of her family and their secrets, but in place she
					takes on the role of a real mother. The past proves resilient, however,
					and some traces of it remain even after Lecon is laid to rest. For
					example, even though she makes every effort to escape the past,
					Ida names her son Lecon. The name becomes “Lee,” but the fact that
					Clara can persuade Ida, against her better judgment, to name her
					son after her father reveals the extent to which the past still
					has a hold on her.

