Harry finds out he will be Quidditch Captain this year.
					Mrs. Weasley arranges a trip to Diagon Alley to buy school supplies,
					and the usually bustling area is desolate. The group splits, with
					Harry, Hermione, Ron, and Hagrid, who has come along for added security, headed
					to Madam Malkin’s for robes. Hagrid waits outside as the students
					enter Madam Malkin’s, where they find Draco Malfoy being fitted.
					Malfoy accuses Hermione of being a Mudblood, or a wizard born to
					Muggle parents. Eventually Malfoy storms out, and Ron, Hermione,
					and Harry finish their fittings and meet back up with the rest of
					the Weasleys. When they arrive at Fred and George’s joke shop, the
					store is packed with customers. Harry spots Draco scurrying up the
					street alone. He pulls Ron and Hermione under his Invisibility Cloak,
					and they follow Draco into Borgin and Burkes, a store stocked with
					Dark objects.

Harry and his friends eavesdrop on Draco’s conversation
					with Borgin. Draco asks Borgin if he can fix something, threatening
					the shop owner with something Harry cannot see, and reminding him that
					his family is friends with Fenir Greyback. Draco suggests that there
					are two objects, and one needs to be kept safe in the shop. Borgin
					swears secrecy, and Draco leaves. Hermione ducks out from under
					the coat, attempting to see what Draco was talking about, but Borgin
					is suspicious. Hermione asks about a necklace, but Borgin orders
					Hermione out. Before they board the Hogwarts Express, Harry tells
					Mr. Weasley his suspicions about Draco being a Death Eater. On board,
					students stare at Harry. Harry spots Luna Lovegood and Neville Longbottom
					and sits down.

Ron and Hermione enter the compartment, finished with
					their prefect duties. A young woman hands scrolls to Harry and Neville, inviting
					them to join Professor Slughorn for lunch. Harry sees that Ginny
					has also been invited. Slughorn has gathered together what he hopes
					is a group of influential students he would like to cultivate relationships
					with, and repeatedly asks the students about their family connections.
					When they finally escape, Harry asks Ginny how she got tangled up
					with Slughorn, given that the Weasleys are not an especially influential
					family. Ginny tells Harry that Slughorn saw her hex Zacharias Smith
					and was impressed with her skills. Harry has an idea and excuses
					himself, pulling out his invisibility cloak and following Zabini,
					a Slytherin who had also been at lunch with Slughorn.

Harry sneaks into the Slytherin compartment as Zabini
					enters, then he dives into the luggage rack. Harry fears that one
					of his sneakers slid out from under the cloak as he dove out of
					the way and sees Draco’s eyes scanning the racks. Draco boasts that
					he might not even bother returning to Hogwarts next year, having
					moved on to bigger things. Draco’s goons, Crabbe and Goyle, look
					dumbfounded. Draco continues to talk about how things will be different when
					Voldemort finally takes over. The train approaches Hogwarts, and
					the Slytherins begin pulling their trunks down. Goyle’s trunk smacks
					Harry on the head, and he lets out a gasp of pain. Malfoy stares
					up at the luggage racks. After his classmates file out, Draco turns
					around and, without warning, casts a paralyzing spell at the luggage
					rack. Harry tumbles down, frozen. Draco kicks Harry’s face and throws
					the invisibility cloak over his frozen body.

Harry is certain that Draco Malfoy is involved with Voldemort
					and will go to any length to prove Draco’s guilt. Since Rowling
					has made us privy to Snape’s meeting with Narcissa Malfoy, we are
					sympathetic to Harry’s cause. Still, Harry’s friends seem to be
					growing increasingly skeptical of Harry’s convictions while Harry’s
					confidence continues to swell. Clearly, Ron and Hermione are not
					yet ready to believe that Draco is actually a Death Eater like his
					father Lucius. Throughout the Harry Potter series, we often see
					Harry trying his best to convince his friends of something he thinks
					is amiss or incorrect, or to alert them of someone whom he considers
					suspicious or under the influence of Voldemort. Sometimes Harry
					is right, and sometimes he’s wrong. Like most people, he is not
					perfect, and his assumptions do not always prove true. Ron and Hermione’s reluctance
					to believe everything Harry thinks, without questioning his conclusions,
					is indicative of the strength of their relationship. Rather than
					accepting Harry’s ideas, Ron and Hermione ask questions and challenge
					Harry, trying to help him rather than agreeing with whatever he
					says.

The meaning of what Harry overheard at Borgin and Burkes
					is completely unclear at this point in the novel. Harry, Ron, and
					Hermione know that Draco is attempting to fix something, and that whatever
					it is he needs fixed is part of a pair—but they have no idea what
					the object might be. Once again, Rowling purposefully keeps her
					readers guessing. We know that Draco is up to no good, but we, like
					Harry and his friends, are still unclear on the specifics of his scheme.
					Because of all this uncertainty, Rowling is able to create and maintain
					suspense, which, in turn, keeps readers invested in her story. From
					here on out, we learn of Draco’s mischief only as Harry pieces together
					his plot, and we find ourselves inadvertently aligned with his point
					of view. It’s impossible not to root for Harry, because readers
					begin to feel as if they’re a part of his team. Rowling is careful
					to make sure her readers understand that while Harry is imperfect,
					his intentions are always good.

Slughorn gathers in his cabin those students whom he believes
					to be the most potentially influential at Hogwarts, and we quickly learn
					that this doesn’t necessarily mean those with impressive parentage.
					Like Dumbledore, Slughorn does not believe that Pureblood students
					are, by default, the most desirable, and by inviting Ginny Weasley,
					whom he catches performing a particularly impressive hex, we see
					that Slughorn is genuinely interested in the skills and talents
					of his picks. Although Harry never enjoys being singled out for his
					differences, being in Slughorn’s car for lunch gives him a special opportunity
					to sneak into the Slytherin compartment and continue his private
					investigation of Draco Malfoy. While Dumbledore has often cautioned
					his students against becoming too divided and failing to unify as
					a school, the four Houses at Hogwarts are nonetheless fairly segregated,
					and the Slytherins would have never allowed Harry inside of their
					car, nor would he have been able to attempt such an act without
					the help of his cloak. When Draco catches Harry, readers begin to
					understand that Draco is a challenging opponent to Harry, and not
					just the dumb bully that Harry and his friends like to believe he
					is.

