The weather grows warmer. Jack receives a call from his
					ex-wife Janet, now known as Mother Devi, asking if Heinrich can
					come and visit her. She tells him she wants only to talk in a spirit
					of peace and mutual affinity, to which he responds by hanging up. 

The Hitler conference finally begins at College-on-the-Hill,
					and after making a few opening remarks in German, Jack spends most
					of the conference hiding in his office, particularly from the Germans. Jack
					keeps thinking of the gun Vernon gave him, of its power and secrecy. 

Jack drives out to Autumn Harvest Farms for his tests,
					where his body is scrutinized with the latest equipment. After the
					tests, he meets with a man about the results. The man asks Jack
					a series of questions and constantly refers to Jack’s test results
					without actually revealing any of the numbers. The man asks him
					if he was exposed to Nyodene Derivative, and Jack denies it. He
					gives Jack an envelope and tells him to take it back to his doctor. 

Jack and Murray go on a long walk through Blacksmith,
					during which Jack reveals all his fears and frustrations, including
					his inability to cope with death’s inevitability and his inability
					to live a meaningful life in the face of death. Murray notes that
					Jack turned to Hitler to save himself from death, to lose himself
					in Hitler’s power and aura, because “Hitler is larger than death.”
					As a purely intellectual argument, Murray says that one way of relieving
					a fear of dying is to kill. According to Murray, the act of killing
					rejuvenates the killer. He disagrees with Jack’s theory that “every
					plot is a murder in effect.” For Murray, plots affirm life and advance
					consciousness, and he believes that within every man lies a deep-seated
					rage that he can potentially tap into to become a killer. 

Back home, Jack continues to throw away every unused, unwanted
					item he can find, blaming these objects for his inevitable death.
					A letter informing Jack of the arrival of his ATM card comes in
					the mail. 

Lying in bed, Jack shares with Babette parts of his conversation
					with Murray. Thoughts of Mr. Gray flash through Jack’s mind, and
					the next day he begins to carry the gun. Jack learns that Orest
					Mercator’s attempt to set a record for sitting in a cage of poisonous
					snakes failed after Orest was bitten four times in four minutes
					by nonvenomous snakes. While walking through campus, Jack hears
					someone following him. He begins to duck and weave, as if he were
					being shot at or chased. When he finally stops to draw his gun and
					confront his pursuer, he discovers that it’s Winnie Richards. Winnie
					tells Jack that she’s read an article about the manufacturer and
					project manager behind Dylar. From her, Jack learns Mr. Gray’s real
					name, Willie Mink, and also about his unconventional methods of
					luring people to his motel room. Willie Mink, according to the article,
					now lives in that same motel room, having been fired from his job.
					Winnie tells Jack that he can find the motel in Germantown, a neighborhood
					he has never heard of. 

As soon as Jack gets home, he tells Babette he’s leaving
					with the car. She responds in her increasingly evasive, ironic tone.
					Jack leaves the house and steals his neighbor’s car, which has been
					parked with the keys in the ignition ever since the airborne toxic
					event. He drives toward Germantown, recklessly running through lights
					and tolls, fingering the gun in his pocket. As he drives, he feels
					remarkably free and full of life.

The cyclical structure of the novel moves toward an ending
					as the seasons change and the academic school year comes to a close,
					and the recognizably plotted portion of the novel—as opposed to
					the formless, meandering story that comprised the earlier sections
					of the novel—begins to take firm shape. The novel began with an
					affirmation of life and health, demonstrated by the arrival of affluent,
					fresh-faced students, and now the characters are drawing toward
					a violent ending. The specter of death has been approaching more
					visibly in these final chapters, first in the form of Vernon Dickey’s
					gun and now in Murray’s counterargument to Jack’s long-held belief
					that plots tend toward death. Jack and Murray’s supposedly theoretical conversation
					provides another missing piece to the developing plot: death is
					suddenly not only plausible, but necessary. 

Winnie Richards supplies the name of Willie Mink, which
					is the final piece of information needed to move the story to its
					conclusion. Like the gun and Murray’s argument in favor of murder,
					Winnie’s information is deliberately and self-consciously placed
					into the story to propel the action forward. She has not only read
					an article about Dylar but also, somewhat unrealistically, found
					in that article the name and current location of the project manager
					who took advantage of Babette. Conveniently, Jack hears all of this
					on the same afternoon he has brought his gun to class, armed and
					ready for a fight. DeLillo has employed an obvious plot device,
					so purposefully contrived as to be nearly comical. By the time we
					see Jack pulling away in his stolen car, left ready and waiting
					with the key in the ignition, to track down Willie Mink, we recognize
					that highly conventional plot elements are gearing into action. 

Even as death draws nearer, the story maintains its humor
					and ironic smirk. Overtly funny bits pile up: the Hitler conference
					where Jack repeats the name of Hitler’s dog over and over; the farcical, empty
					conversation with the analyst at the absurdly named Autumn Harvest
					Farms; Orest Mercator’s failed performance; and, of course, the
					conveniently named Germantown, where Willie Mink lives. Viewed as
					part of this absurd, comic landscape, the plot devices no longer
					seem quite so implausible. At the same time, the humor of the story
					also creates tension between the situation’s dread and its simultaneous
					absurdity. Jack and Murray’s long discussion perfectly illustrates
					that tension. Poignant, accurate, and humorous, the discussion allows
					Jack to speak about death in a straightforward, unsentimental way
					that lends validity to its substance. 

