The seven-and-a-half-year-old protagonist of the story. Alice’s dream leads to her adventures in Looking-Glass World. Alice has set perceptions of the world and becomes frustrated when Looking-Glass World challenges those perceptions. Alice has good intentions, but has trouble befriending any of the creatures that populate Looking-Glass World.

Read an in-depth analysis of Alice.

A domineering, officious woman who brings Alice into the chess game. The Red Queen is civil but unpleasant, hounding Alice about her lack of etiquette and general knowledge.

Read an in-depth analysis of Red Queen.

An untidy, disorderly mess of a woman. The White Queen explains the properties of Looking-Glass World, including the reversal of time and the need to believe in the impossible.

The sleeping King. Tweedledum and Tweedledee tell Alice that she is not real and exists only as part of the Red King’s dream.

The White King sends his horses and men after Humpty Dumpty after his fall. The White King takes words literally. He is completely helpless and is terrified of the Lion and the Unicorn.

A kind and noble companion who rescues Alice from the Red Knight and leads her to the final square. The White Knight is old with shaggy hair, pale blue eyes, and a gentle face. He is an eccentric who has invented many bizarre contraptions.

Read an in-depth analysis of White Knight.

A contemptuous, egg-like man based on the nursery rhyme character. Humpty Dumpty sits on a wall and treats Alice rudely. He explains the meaning of “Jabberwocky” to Alice but changes the meanings of words.

A pair of identical little fat men dressed as schoolboys. Tweedledum and Tweedledee get along well and finish each other’s thoughts, but wind up fighting each other over a broken rattle.

A mythical beast that resembles a horse with a long horn. The Unicorn battles the Lion. The Unicorn believes Alice to be a monster and tells Alice that he will believe in her if she agrees to believe in him.

The Lion does battle with the Unicorn in the town. The Lion’s actions imitate Alice’s nursery rhyme about the Lion and the Unicorn.

The White King’s messengers. Haigha is the March Hare and Hatta is the Mad Hatter from Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland. Their madness is under control in this story.

An old shopkeeper. The Sheep is cranky and rude to Alice. The White Queen transforms into the Sheep.

Alice’s companion on the train and in the wood. The Gnat grows from normal insect size to become as large as a chicken. He points out potential puns and wordplay to Alice and always seems to be sad.

Alice’s companion through her travels through the wood, where she forgets the names of things. The Fawn is beautiful but runs away when it realizes that Alice is a human and might pose a threat.

A knight who attempts to capture Alice. The Red Knight is captured by the White Knight.

A talking flower. The Tiger-lily speaks civilly to Alice and has some authority over the other flowers.

A talking flower that speaks rudely to Alice.

A talking flower that also speaks rudely to Alice.

Talking flowers. The Daisies are extremely chatty and only quiet down when Alice threatens to pick them.

The White Queen’s daughter. Alice takes Lily’s place as the White Pawn in the chess game.

A passenger on the train with Alice.

A passenger on the train with Alice.

The old footman at Alice’s castle.

