Mortenson realizes that he needs to store the building materials in Skardu
					until he can arrange transportation for the rest of the trip to Korphe. He goes to
					Ali Changazi, who made the arrangements for Mortenson’s earlier K2 trip, and
					Changazi agrees to keep the goods in his warehouse. Akhmalu, a cook from the
					expedition, appears and persuades Mortenson to fulfill his promise to visit
					Akhmalu’s village. At the village, Mortenson finds himself the object of an
					unexpected dispute. The two groups that are arguing both want Mortenson to build his
					school there, but they have different ideas about the type of school it should be.
					Mortenson says he has promised the school to Korphe, but the villagers quarrel
					through the night while eating the feast intended to impress Mortenson. Akhmalu
					reluctantly takes Mortenson back to Skardu, where Mortenson becomes suspicious when
					Changazi will not show him the stored supplies. Next, Mortenson travels to
					Changazi’s village and finds himself faced with another feast and another campaign
					to get the school. Mortenson is so frustrated that he storms out of the gathering
					and refuses to communicate until Changazi agrees to take him to Korphe. The Balti
					men finally give up, and Mortenson tries to be more understanding of their behavior.
					He and Changazi arrive in Korphe after crossing the river by cable car. The
					villagers welcome Mortenson warmly, just as he had envisioned. Haji, however, stuns
					Mortenson by saying that they must build a bridge across the Braldu before they can
					construct the school. Otherwise they will have no way to transport supplies across
					the river.

Mortenson returns to San Francisco expecting a reunion with Marina, but she
					has gone back to her previous boyfriend. In addition, Mortenson is fired from his
					job because he failed to return on schedule. A flashback explains that Mortenson had
					spent two months in Korphe learning about the requirements for the bridge, which
					will be expensive and difficult to build. The villagers were patient and had faith
					in him, so he left Korphe determined to accomplish the task. The narrative returns
					to America, where Mortenson has found another job but still feels depressed and
					defeated. Losing Marina seems different than previous break-ups, and he needs time
					to deal with his emotions. He is too intimidated to call Jean Hoerni again and has
					no idea how else to raise money for the bridge. Fortunately, he receives an
					unexpected phone call from a noted climber, Dr. Louis Reichardt, who was one of the
					first Americans to reach the summit of K2. Mortenson and Reichardt have spoken a few
					times before, and Reichardt has heard about the school project from Jean Hoerni.
					When Mortenson tells him what happened in Korphe, Reichardt offers encouragement and
					urges him to call Hoerni, saying Hoerni can easily afford to fund the bridge.
					Mortenson, who has great respect for Reichardt, feels a return of his old
					self-confidence. As the chapter ends, he places a call to Hoerni.

Chapter 8 presents a series of episodes that are both comical and poignant.
					Mortenson finds himself the target of aggressive “marketing” by canny villagers,
					determined to convince him that their village, rather than Korphe, should have the
					school. They set out arrays of fancy food, which they proceed to eat while arguing
					among themselves. Part of the humor comes from Mortenson’s helplessness in the face
					of their onslaughts. Although Mortenson keeps trying to explain that he is committed
					to Korphe, he is too stunned and too polite to put a firm end to the proceedings.
					The occurrence of two such “marketing” campaigns heightens the humor. However, it is
					significant that Mortenson finds perspective on the events afterward. Although he is
					frustrated by the behavior of Akhmalu and Changazi, whom he had assumed to be
					trustworthy, he realizes that they and the other villagers are acting in part from
					desperation.

Chapter 9 represents a turning point not only in Mortenson’s mission, which
					becomes much more complicated, but also in his personal life. To this point,
					Mortenson has been able to move his school-building project forward simply by
					pushing ahead. His determination, combined with a considerable amount of good luck,
					has been enough to help him succeed. Building a bridge, however, requires that he
					put building the school on hold and refocus his energies on a project that demands a
					great deal of coordination and planning. Though Haji’s request for the bridge shocks
					Mortenson at first, he eventually realizes that it’s necessary, and he recognizes
					his own failure to plan properly. As he tries to deal with this problem, he stays on
					in Korphe to plan the new project, and it apparently never occurs to him that his
					girlfriend, Marina, and his job may not be waiting when he finally returns to
					California. The chapter title, “The People Have Spoken,” has a double meaning. It
					refers directly to the decision in Korphe that a bridge is required. Indirectly, it
					also refers to the decisions of his girlfriend and his boss, who are no longer
					willing to put up with his impulsive, disorganized approach to life.

In these two chapters, Relin shows Mortenson dealing with problems he does not
					expect and does not know how to resolve. Though Mortenson manages to extricate
					himself from the comical feasts, he is quickly hit by another delay, this time
					concerning the bridge. After the difficulties he encounters in Pakistan, he thinks
					returning to America will be a relief, but the opposite is true. He has no job and
					his girlfriend has left. As a result, in Chapter 9 he finds himself alone and
					adrift, his personal resilience finally exhausted. He again feels like a
					disappointment, echoing his feelings in Chapter 1. The suspense in Chapter 1,
					however, was about how Mortenson would survive on the mountain, whereas the suspense
					in Chapter 9 is about whether he will regain his self-confidence. Mortenson believes
					he may have finally failed until he gets the unexpected call from Louis Reichardt,
					who suggests that Mortenson call Jean Hoerni to ask for funding to build the bridge.
					The advice offers Mortenson the encouragement he needs to carry on with his plan to
					build the school in Korphe.

