Circe experiences the first sickness of her pregnancy. Circe tells the nymphs to depart Aiaia, leaving her alone in her ongoing illness. She knows she cannot defend herself against any sailors who come to her shores, so she casts an illusion to make it appear that there is nowhere for a boat to safely come ashore. She reflects that she would truly enjoy the peace of her isolation if she didn’t feel so awful. However, she knows that her illness is a temporary thing and will result in a child, making it all worth it. She believes she will never be lonely again. 

The birth itself is difficult and painful. Circe prays to the goddess of childbirth Eileithyia to come help her, but she never comes. Circe concludes that another god or goddess must be keeping Eileithyia from coming to her aid. In an act of desperation, Circe cuts the baby from her own womb, pulls him out, and cuts the umbilical cord. Getting through that ordeal proves to Circe that she doesn’t need anyone. She can do everything her son, Telegonus, needs all on her own. However, motherhood is much more challenging than she ever anticipated. Telegonus is a fussy baby who screams and cries and keeps Circe from resting or doing anything other than tending to the boy. Still, she loves her child and is fully committed to do anything and everything for him. 

Circe is terrified for Telegonus's safety. It seems to her that there is danger everywhere constantly threatening the boy. She calls forth a prophecy from a scrying pool to see if there is a particularly at risk, suspecting a god who wants to hurt her. No information is given, and Circe’s fears grow. She knows that to protect Telegonus, she must learn what, or who, exactly means him harm. She performs a spell and calls forth whoever is trying to kill her baby, and Athena appears.  

The goddess wants Circe’s child. Circe refuses and reasons that Athena is powerful enough to simply kill the child, so there must be some protection in place. Circe concludes that the Fates have dictated a destiny for the child that Athena cannot change. Still, Athena says she can destroy Circe, leaving the baby to die unprotected. Circe says Athena risks starting a battle between Olympians and the Titans who might want to avenge whatever happens to Circe. She also tells Athena that if she’s trying to hurt Odysseus by killing the baby, it's a bad plan since Odysseus doesn’t know about his son. Still, Athena insists and offers Circe a reward for sacrificing her son, but Circe remains steadfast. Athena finally leaves with the promise that she will get what she wants with or without Circe’s cooperation. 

When she becomes a mother, Circe experiences a new and devastating vulnerability. When Circe commands all her nymphs to leave Aiaia, it is out of a desire to experience motherhood for herself without sharing any of it with anyone, but that desire makes the process isolating and therefore frightening. Her sickness during pregnancy coupled with the difficult birth also demonstrates that Circe can be weakened in ways she never knew of, which is in turn a threat to her immortality. Praying to Eileithyia demonstrates that she doubts her ability to withstand the pain and fear. Despite this, Circe steels herself and is able to do what is necessary. Her ability to literally cut herself open to bring Telegonus into the world reveals that it is through her own vulnerability that Circe may discover her new strength as a mother.  

This chapter explores a paradox between mortality and immortality. Although Circe had feelings for Daedalus and, later, Odysseus, Telegonus proves the first mortal that Circe is truly terrified of losing. The mere fact that he is mortal means that one day Telegonus must die, and Circe will need to endure that pain for eternity. Circe’s determination to protect him from every threat on Aiaia reveals how her fear of loss generates a sacrificial strength in the new mother. Every moment of Circe’s life is devoted to the child. As he cries and screams through his infancy, Circe tries everything to comfort him and assure him he’s safe. Still, Telegonus cannot be soothed, and his inability to find comfort and peace suggest the reality that his life will never be an easy one. Circe must never drop her guard. Her efforts foreshadow the work she will eventually do to protect the baby from the very real threats that exist. 

Athena’s determination to kill Telegonus strengthens Circe’s position as a mother and illustrates how love has become a source of power for Circe. At this point, she is desperate to do anything in her ability to protect her son. Circe’s love for Telegonus is the perfect weapon for any god to use against her. Just as Pasiphaë weaponized Daedalus’s love for his son Icarus in order to keep him under her thumb, Circe’s love for Telegonus can be used to wound her. Still, in forcing a confrontation with the source of the threats against her child, Circe builds newfound courage and power. Athena is absolutely terrifying as she hurls threats and boasts that Circe is no match against her, but Circe proves the gray goddess wrong. Her love for her child reveals in Circe a wit to navigate the confrontation and protect Telegonus. She also withstands Athena’s infinitely valuable bribes: Athena’s friendship and sworn loyalty. When Circe refuses and incites the anger of one of the most powerful Olympians, she demonstrates that she is continuing on her path toward being a very different kind of god. Unlike anyone in her own family or on Mount Olympus, she is an immortal who will always put the love of family first. 

