When Liza first appears in Notes from Underground, her
function seems clear: she is the object of the Underground Man’s
latest literary fantasy and power trip. He has absorbed the literary
archetype of the redeemed prostitute and has cast himself as the
hero who will rescue Liza. Later in the novel, however, her character
becomes more complex. When we first meet her, she matches the stereotype of
a young prostitute: bored, jaded, and somewhat naïve. When Liza
is genuinely moved by the Underground Man’s speech, however, we
realize that she may be even more innocent than expected. A young
girl driven into prostitution by an uncaring family, she still idealizes
romantic love and longs for respect and affection. She treasures
the one declaration of love she has received, a note from a young
medical student who does not know she is a prostitute. The Underground
Man is touched by the fact that Liza so clearly treasures this letter,
but his attitude toward her emotion is somewhat dismissive. We sense
that Liza’s sentiment could come from a less-educated version of
the Underground Man’s Romanticism and that her response to the Underground
Man’s speeches is shallow. Liza wants to participate in the artificial
world the Underground Man creates with his “sentimental” speeches,
because she likes the idea of being a romantic heroine instead of
an ordinary prostitute.

When Liza responds tenderly and understandingly to the
abusive speeches the Underground Man makes at his apartment, however, we
see that she is closer to a real heroine than we may have expected. She
is perceptive enough to see through the Underground Man’s façade
of cruelty and apathy, and she is good-hearted enough to try to
give him comfort and love. When she finally realizes that the Underground
Man is incapable of returning her love with anything but mockery
and humiliation, she leaves with quiet strength and dignity. She
throws away the wad of bills that the Underground Man gives her
as “payment” for her visit, thwarting his attempt to treat her like
a prostitute after she has come to him with help and love.

