Campbell wakes up in his boat after spending the night with Julia. He thinks
					that he loved Julia because she was an independent spirit and he couldn’t bear to
					take that away from her. He leaves while Julia sleeps and goes to the courthouse.
					Neither Sara nor Brian knows where Anna is. Campbell finds her in Kate’s hospital
					room and drives her back to the courthouse. On the way, Campbell pulls over and asks
					Anna why they’re going to court. Anna counters by asking him about his dog. Campbell
					says that the dog is for a hearing problem. Anna says she’s sick of things always
					being about Kate. Campbell points out that Anna is lying, and Anna says Campbell is
					also lying about the dog.

Campbell and Anna arrive at the courthouse, and everyone moves into the
					courtroom. Anna asks Campbell if she’ll have to speak. He lies and says she probably
					won’t. Campbell speaks first and says in the justice system what is legal differs
					from what is moral. Sometimes is hard to tell them apart, but the court is there to
					help. Campbell calls Sara to the stand. She talks about Anna’s conception, and
					Campbell asks her about all the times Anna has undergone a medical procedure to help
					Kate. He also asks if Anna had a choice in any of these cases. Sara says Campbell
					can see things in black and white because he only represents one of her daughters,
					but Sara represents both of her daughters.

During a recess in the trial, Campbell and Anna speak alone. Anna says even if
					they win they still lose. When the trial resumes, Campbell calls Dr. Bergen as his
					second witness. Dr. Bergen says the ethics committee has discussed whether Kate
					should have a kidney transplant and that they arrived at a split decision. Campbell
					asks if the committee discussed the risks to the donor, and Dr. Bergen said it
					wasn’t an issue since Anna wasn’t a patient. Campbell shows Dr. Bergen Anna’s
					hospital records, and the doctor admits that Anna has had several invasive
					procedures. He also admits he voted against the kidney donation since he did not
					believe Kate would live through the procedure.

Anna recalls how Kate saved her when she was a baby. She was in a walker and
					almost rolled onto the street before Kate caught her. In the present, Sara questions
					Dr. Bergen and asks if he has children. She then asks if he ever puts himself into a
					patient’s shoes. She asks if, offered a course of action that could save his child’s
					life, would he question it or try it. He doesn’t answer. Another break follows. As
					Anna leaves the courtroom, she tells her mother she did great.

In 2002, Kate meets a boy named Taylor while she receives platelets and he
					receives chemo. Sara watches them flirt and feels happy that her daughter likes a
					boy. Kate goes on a date with Taylor. That night, Sara overhears Kate gushing about
					it to Anna. Kate goes into relapse, and Sara has difficulty convincing Kate, who
					does not want to be hospitalized again, to undergo a stem cell transplant. The
					oncology team lets Kate begin chemo as an outpatient. Taylor visits Kate during her
					chemo, helps her when she throws up, and asks her to a dance for patients hosted by
					the hospital.

Sara, Kate, and Anna shop for a dress for Kate. Kate fells self conscious
					about her baldness, her chest catheter, and all of the scars on her body from chemo.
					Sara tries to comfort her, but Kate says she can’t fix it every time. Anna drags
					Kate into a hair salon and asks the hairstylist if she can give Kate, who has no
					hair, an up-do or a perm. Anna and Kate laugh at the stunned reaction they get. Kate
					attends the dance with Taylor, and Sara see them kiss. Soon after the dance, Kate
					goes into the hospital for her transplant. She worries because she hasn’t heard from
					Taylor. Sara finds out that Taylor died suddenly, but she waits to tell Kate until a
					month after her transplant. When Kate finds out, she says she loved him and doesn’t
					speak to Sara for a week. Sara finds Kate looking at old pictures, including one of
					Kate when she was a baby, before cancer. Kate remarks that she was
					beautiful.

Anna’s motivation in filing her lawsuit still remains unclear. Anna’s decision
					will almost certainly lead to Kate’s death, but
					Anna obviously loves her sister and has always done all she can to make her feel
					better. Anna has been able to help Kate as no one else can, not only physically but
					emotionally as well. When Kate becomes upset as she, Anna, and Sara shop for a
					dress, Anna finds a way to cheer Kate up. In addition, Anna knows that Kate even
					saved her life once by stopping her walker from rolling into traffic. All of this
					evidence contrasts with Anna’s decision to stop being Kate’s donor. Furthermore,
					Anna does not deny that she lied when she told Campbell that she filed the lawsuit
					so she could finally be the focus of her family’s attention, indicating that the
					real reason Anna filed the lawsuit remains a secret.

Taylor’s introduction into the story allows Sara—and the reader—to see Kate as
					an average teenage girl, but his sudden death underscores the fact that, for Kate
					and the rest of the Fitzgerald family, any sense of normalcy is often fragile and
					temporary. So much of Kate’s presence in the story has been about her illness, but
					her relationship with Taylor reveals a different girl entirely. She falls in love
					and gushes about her first kiss. She goes to a dance. These events resemble the life
					of a typical adolescent girl, though reminders of Kate’s cancer persist. She and
					Taylor flirt during chemotherapy, she has no hair to style for the prom, and Kate
					and Taylor must remove their hospital masks to kiss. Even so, Kate finally has
					something to focus on other than her health, and Kate can bond with Taylor because
					he understands everything Kate endures as a patient since he has experienced it all
					himself. In fact, Taylor represents the only deep emotional connection Kate makes in
					the book with someone outside her family, making his sudden death extremely painful
					for Kate. In addition, his death forces Kate and Sara to recognize that Kate could
					die at any time, practically without notice.

Taylor’s death also serves as another reminder of the life Kate might have had
					if she didn’t have leukemia. After Taylor dies, Sara sees Kate looking at pictures
					of the family and herself when she was younger, before she had cancer. Kate speaks
					about the younger version of herself in the picture as though she were a stranger,
					and Sara thinks to herself that the girl in the picture represents someone they
					never got to know. In other words, the person Kate might have been if she were
					healthy has been lost to them, suggesting that cancer has not only made her sick but
					also transformed who she is as a person. Prior to this point, we have seen the
					devastating physical effects cancer has had on Kate, but now we see for the first
					time the full extent of the emotional distress Kate has experienced because of her
					cancer.

At the trial, Campbell and Sara represent the two sides of the novel’s main
					ethical debate about whether Anna has an obligation to give Kate a kidney. Campbell
					begins by emphasizing that what is moral differs from what is legal. As he argues,
					Brian and Sara may feel that Anna has a moral obligation to give Kate a kidney
					because Anna will suffer only some pain in exchange for Kate’s survival. But from a
					legal standpoint, Anna has no such obligation, and neither Brian, Sara, or the
					doctors involved have ever taken Anna’s legal rights into account. Therefore Anna
					should be medically emancipated and allowed to make her own decisions about her
					health. Sara, on the other hand, argues that she and Brian have not neglected Anna’s
					rights. They have not put Anna in any undue risk and have only followed the
					suggestions of the hospital’s ethics committee. They’ve considered the health of
					both daughters, where Campbell only has to consider Anna’s wellbeing.

