As the younger sister, Nenny is often Esperanza’s responsibility,
				and though her innocence is a major source of annoyance for Esperanza, it
				also signals Nenny’s independence. In many ways, Nenny is a pesky
				little sister. Esperanza must introduce Nenny to her new friends
				and keep her away from bad influences, such as the Vargas kids.
				Nenny also has qualities that Esperanza covets, including two names
				(“Nenny” is short for “Magdalena”), pretty eyes, and shiny, straight
				hair. Though Nenny can be a nuisance and a tag-a-long, and her actions
				often embarrass and annoy Esperanza, she frequently demonstrates
				her independence. When Esperanza, Rachel, and Lucy make up chants
				about hips, Nenny recites old chants that everyone already knows.
				Similarly, when Rachel and Lucy describe clouds with creative metaphors,
				Nenny gives the clouds everyday names such as Jose and Alicia. Nenny’s
				apparent refusal to be creative embarrasses Esperanza, but her choices
				suggest she has her own way of surviving on Mango Street. 

Nenny and Esperanza don’t seem very much alike, but their
				differences in age and sociability mask their fundamental similarities. Nenny
				and Esperanza laugh at the same things, even those things others
				don’t understand are funny. More important, Nenny and Esperanza
				are both dreamers. While Esperanza imagines a world outside the
				barrio, Nenny turns the outside world into the barrio by giving
				the clouds the same names as her neighbors. By doing so, she enlarges
				her world and makes it bearable. She turns Mango Street into the
				center of the universe, a place where she can be happy. Nenny and
				Esperanza are also very steadfast in their ideas, though Nenny is
				less likely to go along with the other girls if her views differ. While
				Esperanza, Lucy, and Rachel bounce ideas off each other, Nenny pursues
				her own idea. She is not distracted from her dreams, even when the
				other girls give her dirty looks. Despite Nenny’s similarities to
				Esperanza, Nenny does not have as much a part in Esperanza’s narrative
				as other women. Esperanza observes most of the women in her life
				closely and gives each of them a chapter—except for Nenny. Nenny
				ultimately recedes from view as Esperanza pursues life beyond Mango
				Street. 

