Alice approaches the portly twins Tweedledee and Tweedledum, who
					stand side by side with their arms around each other’s shoulders.
					Upon seeing them, Alice begins reciting a poem that she knows about
					them. The poem describes Tweedledee and Tweedledum fighting over
					a broken rattle until a crow frightens them, causing them to forget
					their argument. They deny that this has ever happened, and though
					they ignore Alice’s questions about how to get out of the wood,
					they do extend their hands to her in greeting. Alice does not want
					to choose one over the other, so she grabs each man’s hand and the
					three begin dancing in a ring. After a short dance, they stop, and
					though Alice continues to ask how to get out of the wood, Tweedledee
					and Tweedledum ignore her. 

Tweedledee begins reciting “The Walrus and the Carpenter,”
					a poem that describes the story of a Walrus and a Carpenter who
					trick a group of young oysters into leaving their home underwater
					and coming to shore with them. Once the oysters get to shore, the
					Walrus and the Carpenter eat them. When Tweedledee finishes, Alice states
					that she prefers the Walrus because he feels sympathy for the oysters.
					Tweedledee points out that the Walrus ate more oysters than the
					Carpenter, and Alice changes her mind, stating her new preference
					for the Carpenter. Tweedledum observes that the Carpenter ate as
					many oysters as he could, which causes Alice to doubt her feelings. 

As she tries to sort out her feelings, Alice becomes distracted
					by the Red King sleeping under a tree and snoring like a train engine. Tweedledee
					tells Alice that the Red King is dreaming about her, and if he stops,
					she will vanish. Alice starts to cry at the thought that she is
					real, and Tweedledee and Tweedledum try to comfort her by telling
					her that her tears are not real.

Alice decides that Tweedledum and Tweedledee are talking
					nonsense and that she is indeed real. Alice changes the subject
					and starts to leave when Tweedledee grabs her wrists and points
					to a broken rattle on the ground. Tweedledum recognizes it as his
					new rattle, and explodes in anger while Tweedledee cowers in fear.
					Tweedledee calms down and the two agree to a battle to determine
					ownership of the rattle. Alice helps them put on their battle gear,
					but before they can begin fighting, a great crow comes and scares
					them off, and Alice slips away into the wood alone. 

Tweedledum and Tweedledee are mirror images of one another, reintroducing
					the theme of inversion. With the exception of their names, the two
					little fat men are identical in looks, manner, and stance. They
					exhibit perfect symmetry, standing together with their arms around
					each other, so that when they extend their free hands they each
					reflect the other’s body position. Their conversation also displays
					a symmetrical position designated by Tweedledee’s favorite expression,
					“contrariwise.” “Contrariwise” functions as a transitional word
					that flips the premise of the conversation. Tweedledee usually addresses
					the other side of whatever Tweedledum just said. The twins’ reversal
					of language becomes apparent in the following exchange with Alice:

TWEEDLEDUM: I know what you’re thinking about . . . but
					it isn’t so, nohow.

TWEEDLEDEE: Contrariwise . . . if it was so, it might
					be . . . That’s logic.

The inversion motif appears on a larger scale in the fight
					between Tweedledee and Tweedledum, since it appears at the beginning
					of the chapter in Alice’s recitation and ends the chapter as an
					actual event. Their scripted quarrel reveals the power of language
					to affect outcomes. Language has an almost magical effect on Tweedledee and
					Tweedledum in creating a rattle that did not exist before the two met
					Alice. Language also seems to cause their battle. Tweedledum and
					Tweedledee must play out the events of Alice’s rhyme, and their lives
					are destined to imitate the events in the poem.

The episode with the sleeping Red King causes Alice to
					question whether or not she actually exists. The possibility that
					she may be a figment of the Red King’s dream complicates her already
					slippery hold on reality. Tweedledee’s suggestion questions the
					stability of reality itself. Alice has already experienced the loss
					of her name, a fundamental aspect of her sense of self. Here, she
					loses the security of her material existence in the world. If the
					Red King is in fact dreaming Alice into existence, then he is the
					only thing in Looking-Glass World that truly exists. The only way
					to test this hypothesis would be to wake the Red King up, but if
					he has imagined Alice, Tweedledum, and Tweedledee, none of them
					would be able to ask him about it, since they exist only in his
					dreams and thus cannot affect his waking life. Even Alice’s emotions
					are artificial, since her tears are only real to her. Though the
					tears serve as evidence of real emotion, that real emotion exists
					as a figment of the King’s dream.

The episode of the Red King’s dream opens up greater implications
					for Alice and the readers about reality and the nature of God. The
					presence of the Red King suggests the notion that no person actually
					exists, but lives solely as a fragment of a divine imagination. The
					chessboard motif makes sense as a tool for organizing the story since
					it functions as an allegory for human life in general. The characters
					in the story live a deterministic existence in which they have no
					free will and move about according to the will of their creator. Free
					will is an illusion in this world, since the residents of Looking-Glass
					World must follow the rules of the chess game in all of their actions.
					The idea of free will as an illusion challenges our understanding
					of Alice’s adventures, since we have understood that they exist
					as part of Alice’s own imagination. By introducing the possibility
					that Alice acts under the manipulation of a larger divine force, Carroll
					presents the idea that human life exists as an abstraction of the
					imagination of a larger divine force.

