Sally Seton exists only as a figure in Clarissa’s memory
				for most of the novel, and when she appears at Clarissa’s party,
				she is older but still familiar. Though the women have not seen
				each other for years, Sally still puts Clarissa first when she counts
				her blessings, even before her husband or five sons. As a girl,
				Sally was without inhibitions, and as an adult at the party, she
				is still effusive and lacks Clarissa’s restraint. Long ago, Sally
				and Clarissa plotted to reform the world together. Now, however,
				both are married, a fate they once considered a “catastrophe.” Sally
				has changed and calmed down a great deal since the Bourton days,
				but she is still enough of a loose cannon to make Peter nervous
				and to kindle Clarissa’s old warm feelings. Both Sally and Clarissa
				have yielded to the forces of English society to some degree, but
				Sally keeps more distance than Clarissa does. She often takes refuge
				in her garden, as she despairs over communicating with humans. However,
				she has not lost all hope of meaningful communication, and she still
				thinks saying what one feels is the most important contribution
				one can make to society. 

Clarissa considers the moment when Sally kissed her on
				the lips and offered her a flower at Bourton the “most exquisite
				moment of her whole life.” Society would never have allowed that
				love to flourish, since women of Clarissa’s class were expected
				to marry and become society wives. Sally has always been more of
				a free spirit than Clarissa, and when she arrives at Clarissa’s
				party, she feels rather distant from and confused by the life Clarissa
				has chosen. The women’s kiss marked a true moment of passion that
				could have pushed both women outside of the English society they
				know, and it stands out in contrast to the confrontation Peter remembers between
				Sally and Hugh regarding women’s rights. One morning at Bourton,
				Sally angrily told Hugh he represented the worst of the English
				middle class and that he was to blame for the plight of the young
				girls in Piccadilly. Later, Hugh supposedly kissed her in the smoking
				room. Hugh’s is the forced kiss of traditional English society,
				while the kiss with Clarissa is a revelation. Ultimately, the society
				that spurs Hugh’s kiss prevails for both women. 

