[S]he would know well enough how one
					single glance would reawaken their lost love.

Officers come to the Bovarys’ house to inventory their
					belongings, which they intend to seize to pay Emma’s debts. They
					leave a guard behind; Emma hides him in the attic to keep the development
					secret from Charles. She schemes and plans to raise the 8,000 francs.
					The bankers in Rouen refuse to loan her the money, however, and
					Leon angrily refuses to steal the money from his employer. However,
					he does halfheartedly agree to try to raise the money from among
					his friends and bring it to her in Yonville. Upon her return home,
					Emma gives her very last five-franc piece to the blind beggar. She
					finds that a public notice has been posted in Yonville announcing
					the auction of the Bovarys’ belongings.

	Emma goes to see the town lawyer, Guillaumin, who agrees
					to help her in return for sexual favors. Emma angrily refuses his
					offer and leaves. Charles has still not returned home and has no
					idea what is transpiring, but all the people of Yonville gossip
					and wonder what will happen. Two of the townswomen spy from an attic
					window as Emma goes to see Binet, the tax collector, in the attic
					where he is amusing himself by making napkin-rings on a lathe. They
					see Emma beg for more time to pay her taxes, then attempt to seduce
					Binet. When he rebuffs her, Emma decides to go to Rodolphe, hoping
					that what she believes is his love for her will enable her to get
					the money from him by offering herself in return.

Rodolphe is indeed aroused by the sight of Emma, but when
					he realizes the purpose of her visit, he becomes taciturn, and tells
					her he has no money available. Emma angrily leaves, realizing the
					full extent of her desperate situation. She goes to Homais’s apothecary
					shop, where she convinces Justin to let her into the cabinet where
					she knows the arsenic is kept. She eats a big handful of it straight
					from the bottle, then returns home, feeling at peace. Charles has
					learned about the auction and searches frantically for Emma. He
					finds her in bed, and she gives him a letter, ordering him not to
					open it until the next day.

	At first, Emma feels nothing and imagines that she will
					just fall asleep and die. Then an inky taste fills her mouth, and
					she becomes violently ill, with a terrible pain in her stomach.
					Charles opens her letter and reads that she has poisoned herself.
					He and Homais desperately try to figure out what to do. Homais decides
					that they must analyze the poison and create an antidote. Emma is
					kind to Charles and little Berthe. Charles and Homais summon doctors
					from Rouen, including the famous doctor Larivière, but there is
					nothing to be done. The priest arrives to give her the sacrament.
					Charles weeps by Emma’s bedside, and Emma also weeps. The last sound she
					hears is that of the blind beggar singing underneath her window as
					she dies.

In the chapters leading up to Emma’s death, her financial
					situation parallels and symbolizes her moral depravity. Her interactions
					with men throughout the chapters demonstrate her growing moral turpitude.
					When she visits the lawyer, he treats her as if she were a prostitute.
					She then flirts with Binet, compromising her dignity even further.
					Finally, she tries to go back to Rodolphe, essentially willing to
					sell herself—in direct contrast to her outrage when Guillaumin asked
					her to do exactly that only a few hours earlier. Flaubert describes
					her unequivocally as a prostitute, adding only that she is “not
					in the least conscious of her prostitution.” Emma is still able
					to delude herself with sentimental and romantic ideas—the only difference
					between selling herself to Guillaumin and to Rodolphe is that Emma
					can tell herself that Rodolphe loves her.

	Although Emma has carefully constructed a romantic fantasy world
					for herself throughout the novel, financial reality wrenches her,
					fully and finally, out of her dreams. There is no more hiding from
					her debt; there is no more eluding the facts of the world around her
					by seeking refuge in fantasy. Every attempt Emma makes in this section
					to circumvent or overcome her problems separates her from her dreams
					and demands that she face up to the ruin she has made of her life.
					Leon is unable to help. She has no recourse. She is desperate to
					hide her affairs and her financial indiscretions from Charles. Forced
					to face the actual consequences of her actions, she decides that
					she would rather die.

	In the world of Madame Bovary, a woman’s
					only power over a man is sexual. In this section, men hold all of
					the financial power. Emma and her maid, Félicité, rack their brains
					for possible solutions, but in the end, men have the ultimate power
					to rescue Emma. The only strategies that Emma can employ to pull
					herself out of ruin depend on her posing as a seductress. Even Emma’s
					death depends on Justin’s susceptibility to her wiles. Ultimately,
					women only can watch the action of men and the world. They themselves
					are able to influence the world only sexually, and only in a limited
					way. The townswomen who watch Emma’s unsuccessful attempt to seduce Binet
					embody the status of females as spectators.

	Throughout the novel, Emma has been the victim of a string
					of disappointments with the physical world’s failure to fulfill
					her romantic desires. Her death is her final disappointment. She
					believes that she will die quietly and romantically, and an “ecstasy
					of heroism” drives her to eat the arsenic. This “ecstasy” is soon
					transformed into bodily agony and a stinking mess on the floor,
					when she vomits, writhes in pain, and begs for the poison to work
					faster. The fact that the act of poisoning herself is called “eating”
					associates it with the physical act of consumption that has so disgusted
					Emma and Charles throughout the book. Emma’s lifelong desire to
					escape the confines of the material world is thus completely destroyed
					by her death.

	Flaubert’s realistic description of the material world
					persists through Emma’s death scene, relentlessly suggesting that
					Emma’s romantic world bears no resemblance to reality. Flaubert
					litters the scene with banal commentary on the furniture and the
					conversations of the men around Emma. Homais, who stands for bourgeois pomposity
					and banality, seems entirely oblivious to Emma’s final throes of
					agony. His pompous stupidity is contrasted with Larivière’s intelligent
					simplicity and wit in just a few short phrases. When Homais says,
					“I wished, doctor, to make an analysis, and primo I delicately
					introduced a tube,” the doctor replies, “you would have done better
					to introduce your fingers into her throat.”

	Emma’s death is firmly grounded in a very realistic description
					of her society. Although it seems possible in earlier sections that
					Emma will transcend her class, in this section, Flaubert makes it
					especially clear that Emma is a member of the bourgeois middle class.
					She is neither peasant nor wealthy merchant. Flaubert highlights
					her class position by introducing minor characters with class status
					both below and above Emma’s. The first is Mère Rollet, the nurse
					whom Emma goes to see in a moment of desperation. Mère Rollet reveals her
					status as a simple peasant in her ability to tell time by holding
					her fingers up to the sun. Later, left alone in Mère Rollet’s hut,
					Emma can’t figure out what time it is because there is no clock.
					We see that she is much less a peasant than her nursemaid. At the
					opposite extreme is Guillaumet, whose splendid house Emma examines
					in awe when she goes to beg him for money. By including these contrasts
					at such an important moment in the book, Flaubert stresses that
					Emma’s social class is essential to her situation and the events that
					befall her.

