Although Utterson witnesses a string of shocking events,
				Utterson himself is a largely unexciting character and is clearly
				not a man of strong passions or sensibilities. Indeed, Stevenson
				intends for him to come across in this way: from the first page
				of the novel, the text notes that Utterson has a face that is “never
				lighted by a smile,” that he speaks very little, and that he seems
				“lean, long, dusty, [and] dreary.” Yet, somehow, he is also “lovable,”
				and dull and proper though he may be, he has many friends. His lovability
				may stem from the only interesting quality that Stevenson gives
				him—namely, his willingness to remain friends with someone whose
				reputation has suffered. This loyalty leads him to plumb the mystery
				that surrounds Jekyll.

Utterson represents the perfect Victorian gentleman. He
				consistently seeks to preserve order and decorum, does not gossip,
				and guards his friends’ reputations as though they were his own.
				Even when he suspects his friend Jekyll of criminal activities such
				as blackmail or the sheltering of a murderer, he prefers to sweep
				what he has learned—or what he thinks he has learned—under the rug rather
				than bring ruin upon his good friend.

Utterson’s status as the epitome of Victorian norms also
				stems from his devotion to reason and common sense. He investigates what
				becomes a supernatural sequence of events but never allows himself
				to even entertain the notion that something uncanny may be going
				on. He considers that misdeeds may be occurring but not that the
				mystical or metaphysical might be afoot. Thus, even at the end, when
				he is summoned by Poole to Jekyll’s home and all the servants are
				gathered frightened in the hallway, Utterson continues to look for
				an explanation that preserves reason. He desperately searches for
				excuses not to take any drastic steps to interfere with Jekyll’s
				life. In Utterson’s devotion to both decorum and reason, Stevenson depicts
				Victorian society’s general attempt to maintain the authority of
				civilization over and against humanity’s darker side. Stevenson suggests
				that just as Utterson prefers the suppression or avoidance of revelations
				to the scandal or chaos that the truth might unleash, so too does
				Victorian society prefer to repress and deny the existence of an
				uncivilized or savage element of humanity, no matter how intrinsic
				that element may be.

Yet, even as Utterson adheres rigidly to order and rationality,
				he does not fail to notice the uncanny quality of the events he
				investigates. Indeed, because we see the novel through Utterson’s
				eyes, Stevenson cannot allow Utterson to be too unimaginative—otherwise
				the novel’s eerie mood would suffer. Correspondingly, Stevenson
				attributes nightmares to Utterson and grants him ominous premonitions
				as he moves through the city at night—neither of which seem to suit
				the lawyer’s normally reasonable personality, which is rarely given
				to flights of fancy. Perhaps, the novel suggests, the chilling presence
				of Hyde in London is strong enough to penetrate even the rigidly
				rational shell that surrounds Utterson, planting a seed of supernatural
				dread.

