Dagny must cut trains from her schedules as Colorado’s
					economy collapses. No one is able to draw oil from Wyatt’s fields,
					and companies that depended on his oil go out of business. With
					severe oil shortages and government rationing, much of the country
					turns to coal. But Andrew Stockton, a maker of coal furnaces who
					stands to make a fortune, has mysteriously vanished. Lawrence Hammond
					is gone as well. He had been the last car manufacturer. Ken Dannager, of
					Dannager Coal, is one of the few industrialists left. The only Taggart
					train running on oil is the Taggart Comet, its transcontinental flagship,
					but all others are running on coal. Taggart is pulling less and
					less every day, but Jim has acquired a stream of subsidies from Washington
					that keep Taggart profits at an all-time high. 

Dagny has intensified her quest to rebuild
					the motor. She calls Robert Stadler, hoping he can help her find
					an engineer. When she shows him what she has, he is amazed at the
					mind that created it. He wonders why such a pure mind would be concerned
					with such mundane things as motors. He recommends a physicist named Quentin
					Daniels, a brilliant man who had refused to work at the State Science
					Institute. 

The Fair Share Law dictates that Rearden must supply metal
					to all who ask, but there is no way to meet all the orders. Men
					with influence manage to acquire much more than their “fair share,” while
					legitimate orders go unfilled. The government sends a young man
					to the mills to work as Deputy Director of Distribution and determine
					the amounts of orders. The steelworkers call him “the Wet Nurse.”
					Rearden chooses to ignore an order from the State Science Institute
					for something called Project X. A week later, a man from the Institute
					comes to see Rearden. He tries to convince Rearden to acquiesce,
					but Rearden refuses. Rearden tells the representative to bring in
					trucks and steal as much metal as the Institute needs, but he will
					not help Washington pretend that he is a willing seller. The man
					seems frightened. He issues some vague threats and leaves. Afterwards,
					Rearden begins to realize the looters need his sanction, which he
					must never give. 

Dagny begins to believe that a destroyer is
					at work, removing the smartest and most talented industrialists.
					Nearly every businessman in Colorado is gone. Dagny feels that she
					must fight this force, whatever it is. She hires Quentin Daniels,
					the man Stadler recommended, to work at reconstructing the motor.
					In a furtive meeting, Rearden arranges to sell Ken Dannager a larger
					order of Rearden Metal than the law allows. 

Jim marries Cherryl Brooks at a gala wedding party. Although
					he does not want to go, Rearden agrees to accompany his wife. Lillian tells
					Jim her gift is bringing Rearden, because now others will think Rearden
					is scared of Jim, which will help Jim’s reputation. At the wedding,
					Lillian notices Dagny wearing the Rearden Metal bracelet and asks
					for it back, but Dagny refuses. Lillian vaguely suggests that Dagny
					may be inviting conjecture by wearing it. When Dagny asks her directly
					if she means to imply that she and Rearden are having an affair,
					Lillian denies it. Rearden, standing nearby, demands that she apologize
					to Dagny. Both women are shocked. After some hesitation, Lillian
					offers an apology. Rearden once stood by his wife, but now he stands
					by Dagny.

Francisco d’Anconia is also at the party. Upon hearing
					a remark that money is the root of all evil, and d’Anconia is its
					typical product, Francisco replies with an astounding dissertation
					on the true role of money. Money, he says, is the antithesis of
					evil and in fact represents the greatest good. Francisco tells Rearden
					that there is no evil except the refusal to think and that this
					is precisely the mistake Rearden is making by living as he does.
					He wants to show Rearden the alternative. Tomorrow morning, he says,
					the holders of d’Anconia stock will discover that nearly every mine
					has been destroyed as a result of poor management. D’Anconia stock
					will collapse. Francisco’s comments create a panic in the room,
					as many guests, especially Jim, will lose huge investments. 

Dr. Stadler sees science as the abstract realm
					of pure thought, but for Dagny, science serves the practical needs
					of life. Humans are fundamentally irrational in Stadler’s thinking,
					so any application of science to human life is equally irrational.
					In response to the motor, he wonders why any mind so purely brilliant
					could be interested in the mundane, practical application of his
					discoveries. Dagny, on the other hand, assumes that the inventor
					created a practical tool because he liked life and “belonged on
					Earth.” The inventor, like Dagny, understood the role of thought
					in man’s happiness on Earth. He did not believe in the separation
					of thought and action or mind and body, but believed in their integration.
					This integration is a critical feature of Rand’s philosophy, which
					holds that rational thought cannot be separated from the things
					it creates or the world it powers. 

The Wet Nurse embodies the collectivist world in which
					he was trained. Although he has a degree in metallurgy, he has no
					practical skills. He merely repeats things he has been told and
					uses words cleverly so as not to say anything clearly. He is taken
					aback by Rearden’s insistence on calling things exactly what they
					are. His job is to determine Rearden’s output so that it is in compliance
					with the laws. But without the laws, there would be no need for
					his job in the first place. Rand, a strong proponent of unfettered
					capitalism, uses him to demonstrate the absurd ways in which bureaucracy
					fuels its own growth and the waste and foolishness required to keep
					an artificial system running. In a capitalist system, Rearden would
					be free to produce as much steel as his customers require, and they
					would be free to buy it or to go elsewhere if he could not give
					them what they wanted. For Rand, the simplicity of free markets
					stands in obvious contrast to the complex bureaucratic structures
					seen here. 

Jim’s wedding offers more insight into the back-door intrigue that
					runs the looters’ world. Everyone at the party falls into one of two
					categories: those who have come as a favor to Jim and those who
					have come in fear of his hostility. The first group consists mostly
					of Washington men, the second mostly of businessmen. The sum of
					the two groups is an estimation of Jim’s power. Their complicated
					web of influence is based solely on each man’s connection to the
					ultimate power in the decaying nation: physical force. Though everyone
					knows this, no one is willing to admit it. The bare, ugly truth
					of their power hides behind a mask of words and euphemisms. Francisco
					reveals the fragility of this illusion when he asks if any of them
					realize that to destroy their entire complex structure, it would only
					take someone naming the exact nature of what they are doing. This
					line offers a useful piece of foreshadowing. 

Francisco’s “money speech” lays out some critical elements
					of Rand’s philosophy. In it, he puts forth the idea that rather
					than being the root of evil, money is the manifestation of creativity
					and good. Money is exchanged for and represents the products and
					services created by man. Creative production makes survival and
					prosperity possible and is therefore the highest good. If a man’s
					ability to be productive is represented by his ability to make money,
					then money is a moral tool and an indicator of the value of man.
					Another key element of Rand’s philosophy demonstrated here is the
					necessity of accepting and stating what is real. For Rand, as for
					Francisco, the only evil is the refusal to think. The looters’ success
					depends on their victims refusing to see or confront what is happening.
					But the heroes—Dagny, Rearden, and Francisco—will not go along.
					They insist on clarity and straight speaking, which rattles the
					looters, who are themselves in denial. 

Finally, the altercation between Dagny and Lillian marks
					a growing change in Rearden. He has already begun to understand
					that he cannot be victimized without giving his sanction to his
					victimizers. When he tells the representative from the State Science
					Institute that he will not pretend to be a willing seller but will
					force them act as the thieves they really are, he understands his
					own power in his business affairs. When Dagny refuses to go along
					with Lillian’s vague accusations but forces her to be specific,
					Rearden sees that Lillian also requires the sanction of her victim.
					He stands by Dagny now, just as he stood by Lillian previously.
					He has begun, slowly, to integrate his public and private selves
					and understand his power. Meanwhile, Francisco continues to counsel
					him and arm him with moral clarity. 

