The residents of the annex use too much electricity and
					exceed their ration. Anne begins to feel that Mr. Dussel is a strict
					disciplinarian and has too many opinions about etiquette. She writes
					that it is very difficult being “the badly brought-up center of
					attention in a family of nitpickers.” Hanukkah and St. Nicholas
					Day come on almost the same day, so the annex holds two celebrations.
					They light the Hanukkah candles for only ten minutes, since candles
					are in short supply. For St. Nicholas Day, Father hides a basket
					filled with presents and a mask of Black Peter in a cabinet.

	Mr. van Daan makes sausages to preserve the meat they
					have bought. Mr. Dussel opens a pretend dental practice in the annex
					and comically attempts to fix Mrs. van Daan’s cavities. Anne tires
					of Mrs. van Daan’s incessant complaints and is annoyed that Mr.
					Dussel constantly tells her to be quiet at night but then wakes
					her up when he does his exercises at dawn. Anne marvels at how diplomatic
					she has become while living in the annex. Mr. Kugler brings the
					residents gravy packets to fill because he can find no one else
					to do the job. According to Anne, however, it is a prisoner’s job.

	Anne writes more about the terrible events that are happening outside.
					Jews are being taken from their homes and separated from their families,
					and non-Jewish children are wandering the streets in hunger. Anne
					writes that both Christians and Jews want the war to end, and she
					believes that her family is better off than people outside the annex.

	Anne seethes that everyone is always yelling at her and
					calling her “exasperating,” and she wishes she had a personality
					that did not antagonize everyone. Mr. Frank thinks the war will
					end soon, but the level of anxiety in the annex increases. Anne
					is frightened by the sound of gunfire one night, so she crawls into
					her father’s bed for comfort. Another night, Peter climbs up into
					the loft and a rat bites his arm. Mr. Dussel often writes letters
					to his wife and to others outside, and Mr. Frank demands that he
					stop. The residents have another scare when they think they hear
					burglars in the building. After that incident, the clock suddenly
					stops chiming, which also upsets Anne. Later, the residents hear
					a radio announcement that all Jews must be deported from Utrecht
					and the other provinces of the Netherlands by the beginning of July.

	Mr. Dussel’s wife sends him a package for his birthday.
					Anne notes that Mr. Dussel does not share his sizable stash of personal food
					with the other residents or their Dutch helpers. Although Anne knows
					that her family is better off than the vast majority of Jews, she predicts
					that they will look back and wonder how they lived for so long under
					such difficult conditions. Mr. van Daan says he believes that the
					war will end in 1943.
					When Anne reaches her fourteenth birthday, her father writes her
					a poem, and Margot translates it from German into Dutch.

In this section Anne vents her frustrations at living
					in the annex and dealing with the adults. Anne realizes that the
					general unpleasantness of the annex and the van Daans’ and Mr. Dussel’s
					stinginess pale in comparison to the horrors others are enduring
					outside the annex. Nonetheless, Anne is frustrated at the adults
					and does not think their behavior is warranted. She does not seem
					to make much effort to understand why the adults are acting the
					way they are. This oversight reminds us that although Anne has grown
					up considerably since moving into the annex, she is a young girl
					and still emotionally immature in certain ways. She never takes
					a step back to try to understand the different pressures facing
					the adults. At her age, she is still struggling to understand her
					own nature and motivations, and she is not yet able to expand her
					focus to include the adults and their behavior. Reading her diary,
					we realize that Anne does not bear the burden of trying to protect
					an entire family from the inexplicable evils of the war. On the
					one hand, Anne has the perspective to realize that her situation
					within the annex is not as dire as the situation outside; however,
					she does not yet have the empathy to understand the cause of the
					adults’ tensions.

	The Franks’ holiday observances suggest that even during
					terrible times, they still want to celebrate life. Hanukkah brings
					them some joy, though they must ration their use of Hanukkah candles because
					supplies are scarce. St. Nicholas Day is a traditional Dutch holiday
					that marks the advent of Christmas, and Black Peter is the companion
					to Father Christmas, or Santa Claus. The fact that the Franks celebrate
					Jewish and Christian holidays, and that Anne believes that both
					the Christians and Jews want the war to end, reflects the family’s
					assimilation into European culture. Their acceptance of other cultures
					and religions makes it even more difficult for the Franks to comprehend
					the persecution of the Jews and their treatment as outsiders.

	Anne increasingly interrupts her descriptions of the
					minutiae and social dynamics of the annex with comparisons between
					the annex and the world outside. The radio keeps the residents informed
					of the latest atrocities being committed outside their door, and
					the break-ins disturb their already precarious sense of safety.
					Anne alternately feels that living in hiding is saving her life
					and that it unfairly condemns her. Working out her thoughts in the
					diary helps Anne make sense of the new world and the inconceivable
					reality she is forced to inhabit. She begins to see herself as a
					young girl trapped in a conflict that does not involve her directly.
					Anne looks to the future and the end of the war, imagining that
					the persecution of her people will end and she will be free again.

