Tante Lou, Miss Emma, and Grant arrive at the Pichot plantation. They
					enter through the back door and inform the maid that they wish to
					see Mr. Pichot. Miss Emma was the cook here for most of her life,
					just like her mother and grandmother before her. Grant’s aunt washed
					and ironed, and Grant ran errands. When he left for college, he
					vowed never to enter this place through the back door again. After
					some delay, Henry Pichot and Louis Rougon enter the kitchen. Miss
					Emma asks Pichot to convince his brother-in-law to allow Grant to
					visit the prison and educate Jefferson. Pichot hesitates, and Miss
					Emma reminds him of all the years she spent working for his family. Pichot
					asks Grant what he expects to do, and Grant responds truthfully
					that he does not know. Grant carefully avoids being disrespectful,
					making sure to lower his eyes when necessary. After some cajoling,
					Pichot agrees to speak to his brother-in-law.

After dropping off Miss Emma, Grant informs his aunt that
					he will eat in town, which insults her. He drives to Bayonne. After
					crossing the railroad tracks and making his way down a poorly lit
					road into the black section of town, Grant stops at the Rainbow
					Club where Thelma Claiborne, the owner’s wife, prepares his dinner.
					At Grant’s request, his lighter-skinned girlfriend Vivian arrives.
					She sits with Grant and they talk quietly. He offers to take her
					and her children far away from the town, but she considers the idea
					unrealistic and threatens to leave the bar if he continues to speak
					about it. She asks him why he has not left town for good, and he
					replies that he wants to be with her. She calls him a liar, because
					he once left the town to stay with his parents in California. When
					Vivian asks him why he returned, Grant avoids the question. She
					reminds him that they cannot be so open about their love for one
					another until she finalizes her divorce. While dancing, Grant tells
					her about Jefferson’s sentence. Angry and afraid, Grant wonders
					if he can teach Jefferson how to die when Grant himself doesn’t
					know how to live.

The next morning, Grant returns to the plantation school
					where he teaches black children through the sixth grade. His school
					is in a church, and his desk is a table normally devoted to the
					Sunday collection. Grant teaches only five and a half months out
					of the year, because his students work in the fields the rest of
					the time. In a foul mood, Grant punishes his students for the slightest
					offenses, though they try to avoid upsetting him. After a few hours,
					he steps outside and surveys the homes near his school. He knows
					many details about the troubled lives of their inhabitants. When
					he returns to his classroom, he finds a student playing with an
					insect. He sneaks up behind the young boy and slaps him hard across
					the back of the head with his ruler. Furious, Grant finds himself
					telling the class about the task Miss Emma has set for him. He explains
					how Jefferson will die and says he must make Jefferson into a man,
					which is exactly what he is trying to do with them. Toward the end
					of class, a small man enters the church and informs Grant that Mr.
					Henri Pichot wishes to see him.

The main conflict of A Lesson Before Dying lies
					within Grant himself. Even though Grant struggles to manage in the
					racist white society, his primary struggle is with his own mind.
					As he says to Vivian, he cannot face Jefferson because he cannot
					face himself and his own life. Vivian exposes Grant’s conflicted
					nature by bringing up the fact that he left the South in the past
					but eventually returned. Grant feels repulsed by the environment
					in which he grew up, but somehow he cannot bring himself to leave.
					Despite his statement that Vivian’s presence is the reason that
					he remains in Bayonne, Vivian knows that there are larger issues
					at play here. The novel shows that Grant’s pride and self-centered
					qualities prevent him from truly appreciating the people with whom
					he lives. When he finally learns how to view his family and friends
					positively, he becomes able to live in the South with strength and
					courage.

Undoubtedly, however, Grant is not completely
					responsible for his inability to overcome his inner conflict. Life
					in the South during the time of Jim Crow segregation was harrowing
					for blacks and Grant’s vacillation between cynical confidence and despair
					results from his daily struggle against the forces of racism. Here,
					Gaines paints Grant’s visit to Henri Pichot as a humiliating experience.
					Grant, Tante Lou, and Miss Emma have to enter Pichot’s house through
					the servants’ entrance in the back and then must wait awkwardly
					until Pichot deigns to see them. They talk to Pichot as servants
					to master, careful to appear respectful and able to appeal only
					to his sense of duty and generosity for help. Moreover, as Pichot
					oppresses blacks by making them serve and beg, the town of Bayonne
					oppresses them by segregating them to the back of the town. White
					families own the plantations and fields, and black families work
					them. White men run the jails, and black men rot in them. White
					women bear white children, and black women care for them. Gaines
					shows that the blacks are not only segregated, but they receive
					meager resources, such as electricity. The road to the black section
					of town is noticeably darker than the main streets with -streetlights. 

	The inequities of racism also divide blacks from each
					other. Although Grant is inextricably bound to Tante Lou and Miss Emma,
					he is also distanced from them. He feels pressured by Tante Lou
					to conform to the racist expectations of the whites. He drives the
					women to Pichot’s, yet he cannot stand living as they do, constantly
					submitting to white authority. He refuses Tante Lou’s food in order
					to show his resentment and disapproval of her behavior. Grant feels
					both a connection to and a detachment from his pupils. He wants
					them to thrive, to transcend the low-class work for which they have
					been slated, but he expresses frustration when they do not exhibit
					the concentration that will help them thrive. To the extent that
					he wants his students to succeed and identifies with their plight, Grant
					is on their side. Just as his aunt angers him, however, his students
					anger him. He deals with them harshly, punishing them for tiny offenses
					and making them afraid. Although he cares for them, he frequently
					seems disgusted by them and convinced that they cannot make anything
					of themselves.

	In these chapters, we see that Grant is a man divided—from
					his family, from his friends, from himself—due to the deeply scarring environmental
					influences of racism. The conflict between Grant and his community
					shows that while racism attempts to lump people into categories
					and degrade them as indistinguishable members of a particular group,
					human beings differ from one another. Not all blacks experience
					or respond to racism in the same manner, and these differences can
					result in conflict and misunderstanding—misunderstanding that must
					be healed before the family and the community can strengthen themselves
					against further oppression.

