The protagonist and narrator of the story. Kambili is a fifteen-year-old girl living in Enugu, Nigeria with her wealthy and devoutly religious family. Kambili is an excellent student, and she tries to do everything she can to make her parents, and especially her Papa, proud of her. Kambili’s quests to please others often leave her tongue-tied and nervous, and she lives in fear of retribution for her small acts of rebellion against her unyielding restrictions. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Kambili.

Kambili’s seventeen-year-old brother. Born Chukwuka, “Jaja” has spent his life following strict family and religious rules and being an excellent student to make his parents proud. However, he is skeptical of his family’s religion and rigid power structure. Jaja is fiercely devoted to his sister and mother, and he often puts himself in harm’s way to protect them. Jaja and Kambili are so close that they can communicate using only their eyes. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Jaja.

The father of Kambili and Jaja. Papa owns several factories and is very wealthy. He is a devout Catholic and a firm believer that all Nigerians who do not convert to Catholicism are heathens. He is generous with his wealth, supporting many causes and giving money to those in need in the name of God. Papa runs a rigid household, demanding total excellence from his children and wife and doling out severe punishments when they disobey him. He is also the publisher of the Standard, a radical newspaper that publishes anti-government rhetoric after the country’s coup. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Papa.

The mother of Kambili and Jaja. Mama is kind and loving toward her children, though she is quiet and tolerates domestic violence from Papa to keep her family together. Beatrice is known as a gracious host, and she is generous with her family and members of the religious community.

Read an in-depth analysis of Mama.

Papa’s sister and mother of Amaka, Obiora, and Chima. Ifeoma is a university professor and widow living in Nsukka, Nigeria. Although Ifeoma doesn’t have much money, she approaches life with a positive attitude and takes good care of her children. She is smart and strong-willed, and she isn’t afraid to stand up to her various oppressors. Though she follows the Catholic faith, she is far less fanatical than her brother. Her infectious, throaty laughter is a trait she shares with her children. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Aunty.

Ifeoma’s oldest child and Kambili and Jaja’s cousin. Amaka is a fifteen-year-old girl living in Nsukka with her family. Amaka is thin with quizzical eyes and is a fast walker and talker. She is outspoken and she challenges Kambili to find her own voice. Amaka is critical of wealth and religion, and she denounces the idea of European superiority. Because of the freedoms her mother and life in Nsukka provide, Amaka is allowed to wear lipstick and pants, and she listens to culturally conscious indigenous music.

A friend of Aunty Ifeoma’s family and a clergyman at their church. Father Amadi is loyal to the Catholic religion, although he has good humor when he is challenged on religious issues. He is dedicated to the development of Nsukka’s underprivileged youth, and he has a deep affection for Kambili that others often interpret as romantic interest.

Ifeoma’s middle child and Kambili and Jaja’s cousin. Obiora is a fourteen-year-old boy living in Nsukka with his family. Obiora tries to be a leader for his family in the absence of his deceased father, and he challenges Father Amadi on notions of Christianity. He has light skin, honey-colored eyes, thick glasses, and an endearing crooked smile. Obiora represents what Jaja’s life could have been like if he had been raised in Nsukka.

Papa and Ifeoma’s father, and Kambili and Jaja’s grandfather. Papa-Nnukwu is an excellent storyteller. He is estranged from his son because he refuses to convert to Christianity and instead follows the pantheistic religion of his ancestors. Papa-Nnukwu is close to Ifeoma’s family and finds joy in the simple offerings of life.

A white priest at St. Agnes Catholic Church in Enugu, Nigeria. Father Benedict is close to Papa and praises him often. He insists that European traditions be followed in the church rather than Nigerian traditions.

A father, husband, and Papa’s editor at the Standard. Ade Coker is brave and dares to stand up to the government with critical editorials, even after he has been arrested and tortured. Papa views him as a member of the Achike family.

The wife of Ade Coker. Yewande is a mother who worries about what will happen to her family if Ade is killed.

Mama’s deceased father, who he exists in the narrative as a memory. Grandfather is revered by Papa because he was Christian and spoke English.

Ifeoma’s youngest child and Kambili and Jaja’s cousin. Chima is a tall seven-year-old boy with very dark skin. He is curious and sensitive.

The Achike family’s cook and housekeeper. Sisi is loyal to the family and travels with them when they go to Abba for Christmas. Though she is essentially a member of the family, Papa refers to her as “that girl.”

The Achike family’s driver. Kevin is loyal to Papa, although he doesn’t always follow Papa’s rules.

Aunty Ifeoma’s deceased husband. Ifediora quarreled with Eugene and didn’t mind telling him what he really felt.

A wealthy and popular student at Kambili’s school. Chinwe is a good student, and one semester she bests Kambili for first in her class, which puts Kambili in danger.

A classmate at Kambili’s school who is kind to Kambili. Ezinne encourages Kambili to try to fit in with the other girls at school.

The ruler of Abba. The Igwe is Christian but still allows some traditional Nigerian religious practices in his home.

The Achike family’s driver after Papa dies. Celestine is gentle and helpful to Mama.

Aunty Ifeoma’s friend who moved from Nsukka to teach in America.

The principal at Daughters of the Immaculate Heart.

The teachers at Daughters of the Immaculate Heart.

Chief of Abba and the only person in Abba with a larger house than Eugene.

A wealthy student at Kambili’s school.

The factory driver who serves as backup driver for the Achike family when Kevin is on leave.

Papa-Nnukwu’s father.

The gate man for the Achike family.

Elders living in Abba that follow traditional religion.

A child who cares for Papa-Nnukwu.

The first white missionary in Abba.

An African missionary who helped “Fada John.”

A university professor who will not speak out about the government taking over the school.

Okafor’s son who stole his exam papers.

A Nigerian activist who was killed by the government.

The Nigerian head of state.

A friend of Chima.

Hairstylists in Ogige Market.

A fellow inmate of Jaja who has been waiting for trial for eight years.

Ifeoma’s friend who does not support her move to America.

The Achike’s cook and housekeeper after Papa dies.

