Morning, Confederate camp. Lee and Longstreet meet to
					discuss the plan of attack for that day. Longstreet still wants
					to fight defensively, but he realizes that Lee has made up his mind
					to attack that day. Ewell and Early think that the Union
					forces on Cemetery Hill and Culp’s Hill are now too concentrated
					to attack. But they suggest that if Longstreet’s men attack the
					left of the Union line, on Little Round Top and along Cemetery Ridge,
					they might draw off enough Union forces to allow Ewell and Early
					to take Cemetery Hill and Culp’s Hill. Once Longstreet is heavily
					engaged with the enemy, Ewell’s forces will strike.

	Lee likes this plan, but he wants Longstreet’s approval.
					The stubborn Longstreet refuses to give his approval, but he also
					refrains from arguing, so Lee simply orders him to attack the Union’s
					left. Longstreet says that he must delay at least an hour until
					one more brigade arrives. Lee outlines his plan to General McLaws,
					who asks if he can send men to examine the roads leading to the
					Union’s left before they march. Longstreet refuses, saying he does
					not want McLaws to leave his division. Another general, Hood, asks
					for permission to send a brigade around the end of the Union line
					to try to disrupt the supply lines in their rear. But Lee refuses
					the offer, saying he needs to concentrate his forces.

	The officers leave to start the battle. Longstreet meets
					with Lee’s engineer, Captain Johnston, who is to guide Longstreet’s
					corps into position for the battle. Longstreet tells him to make
					sure the troops are not observed by Union soldiers. Johnston says
					he has scouted the Union position, but he has not scouted the roads
					leading up to it, and he fears that not knowing the roads will cause
					a problem. Longstreet grumbles to himself at the absence of Stuart,
					who would have reconnoitered all the roads around Gettysburg, had
					he been present.

	The march begins at noon. Lee and Longstreet ride together,
					and for a moment they both feel somewhat giddy, almost looking forward
					to the assault. Then Longstreet reminds them that they once fought
					to defend the very people they are now attacking, making both
					men a bit depressed. Lee says that the “higher duty” was to Virginia,
					to their own people. Lee also talks about the difficulty of command,
					and of loving the army life but also knowing that he is constantly ordering
					his men to their deaths. Longstreet realizes that Lee thinks Longstreet
					is too close to the men and that Longstreet’s love of defensive
					tactics comes from his unwillingness to order them to their deaths.

	Lee rides off and Captain Johnson approaches. Johnson
					reports that if the troops march any farther on the road, the Union
					will be able to see them. Annoyed, Longstreet orders a countermarch
					that takes the troops almost to the point where they started and
					brings them around again, which costs a lot of valuable time. They
					discover that the Union troops have left Cemetery Ridge and dug
					in to the peach orchard just in front of Little Round Top. Longstreet
					is dismayed—Lee’s orders will be difficult to carry out with the
					new Union position, but Longstreet cannot afford the time it would
					take to protest, and he doubts Lee would change his mind even if
					he could be reached. Hood objects to continuing the attack, since
					all their movements are observed, and the Union forces are already entrenched
					in the orchard. Since the Union troops have left the ridge, they
					have left their left flank unsupported and vulnerable. But Lee has
					ordered a frontal assault, and Longstreet believes he has no choice.
					Though the losses will be heavy, Longstreet orders Hood to attack
					the peach orchard. He tells Hood that he must take Little Round
					Top. The battle begins, and heavy losses occur quickly.

Chapters 3 and 4 are
					the turning point of The Killer Angels. Both are long
					chapters that describe critical military actions on the Confederate
					side and the Union side. There are several instances here in which
					the Confederate army is not able to capitalize on the opportunities
					presented to them.

	General Lee’s insistence on a frontal assault creates
					significant problems for the Confederates, and it highlights the
					tension between his and Longstreet’s views of the best strategies
					for conducting the war. Longstreet has been advising for days that
					the Confederacy should move southeast and come between the Union
					army and Washington, D.C. The Confederates would then find some good
					ground and dig in. The politicians in Washington would be terrified
					at the thought of having nothing between them and the Confederate
					army, and, therefore, they would force the Union general, Meade,
					to attack. This is the plan Longstreet has been pushing to Lee,
					but Lee does not want to fight defensively—he wants to win by show
					of force. Flush from two previous victories at Fredericksburg and
					Chancellorsville, Lee thinks he can finish the job at Gettysburg.
					Therefore Lee wants a frontal assault, and Longstreet, loyal to Lee,
					will not disobey orders, stubborn as he is. The situation becomes
					even more painful for Longstreet when he realizes that the Union
					army has actually come down off of Cemetery Ridge and occupied the
					peach orchard. With no troops on Little Round Top or Round Top,
					the Confederates could easily move southeast and attack from behind
					the Union position. But Longstreet is already late in his attack,
					and he orders Hood to attack the peach orchard from the front. This
					decision results in terrible losses on both sides, and it is one
					of the main factors leading to a Confederate defeat.





