McLean Hospital has hosted many famous patients, including
					Ray Charles, James Taylor, Robert Lowell, and Sylvia Plath. Kaysen wonders
					whether poets are particularly vulnerable to mental illness. McLean
					boasts a beautifully landscaped campus and sits on a hill outside
					the affluent town of Belmont, Massachusetts. Occasionally, the girls
					are taken into town for ice cream, a field trip that requires a
					complex system of chaperones and privileges. Patients can be restricted
					to the ward, as Lisa is. Others require one or two nurses to accompany
					them off the ward. Better-behaved patients travel in groups or even,
					though rarely, by themselves. The nurses are nervous as the group
					makes its way into Belmont, whether because of the complexity of
					the duty or embarrassment, Kaysen is unsure.

On a spring day soon after Daisy’s suicide, the nurses
					decide to take the girls into town. Kaysen muses that good weather
					gives people the courage to commit suicide. On the way to Belmont,
					Kaysen reflects on the natural beauty flowering around her; even
					the nurses seem less on edge. Kaysen finds that the tile pattern
					on the floor of the ice cream parlor troubles her. The alternating
					black and white pattern makes her think of indecision, as though
					the irregular tiles represent too many choices. The girls order
					their ice cream in typical fashion, playing suggestive word games
					with the flavor names. The boy behind the counter inadvertently
					asks the girls an innocent question with a sexual undertone. Perhaps
					because of the high spirits of the day, no one takes advantage of
					the opportunity.

Days on the ward are punctuated by “checks,” periodic
					inspections by the nurses. The checks, which occur every five, fifteen,
					or thirty minutes, are intrusive, interrupting the girls’ activities.
					The familiar sound of the turning doorknob “murder[s]” time, in
					Kaysen’s opinion. When time is quantified in such small measurements,
					it moves by too quickly.

The girls are forbidden to possess anything remotely sharp
					for fear that they might injure themselves. Scissors, razors, pins,
					earrings, and even belts are prohibited. Patients struggle to eat
					with plastic or cardboard cutlery. Shaving one’s legs is a particularly
					trying experience. Nurses need to check permission forms and supervise
					the shaving. Kaysen is eighteen and supervised by a nurse only four years
					older than she. Perhaps because of the humiliation, many of the
					girls on the ward have hairy legs. Kaysen jokes that her fellow patients
					are “early feminists.”

Ray Charles, Robert Lowell, Sylvia Plath and other famous
					former residents of McLean Hospital share a gift for poetry. Poetry
					is often distinguished from prose by its structure, a mosaic of
					rhythm, meter, and highly ordered composition. Although poetry can
					be free form, it is typically governed by a complex series of interior
					rules. Kaysen, who admits to a fascination with patterns and order,
					believes that the mentally ill are drawn to poetry’s insistence
					on organization, perhaps as a form of relief from the chaos of their
					minds. The appeal of “meter and cadence and rhythm” seems to “make
					its makers mad,” in Kaysen’s eyes. Kaysen draws a comparison between
					the chaotic but ordered nature of poetry to the occasional trips
					the ward takes to an ice cream parlor in town. Town residents see
					only an unruly gaggle of nurses and mental patients making its way
					through the streets, but the procession is actually as carefully
					ordered as a sonnet. The complexity of the nurse-to-patient ratios
					that govern the size of the group corresponds to the internal systems
					of poetry.

The punishing “checks” system illustrates the numbing
					intrusiveness of life in confinement and reveals the nature of the
					girls’ concept of time. The nurses conduct their checks with robotic
					regularity, determining how much time passes between checks in accordance
					with the likelihood that a patient will harm herself. The most grueling
					check schedule doesn’t permit “enough time to drink a cup of coffee,
					read three pages of a book, [or] take a shower.” The process underscores
					the girls’ helplessness in the face of the nursing authorities and
					the impossibility of even momentary reprieve; Kaysen discovers that
					her graduation to half-hour checks is meaningless, as her roommate
					remains on a fifteen-minute schedule. When time is quantified so
					minutely, one’s awareness of its passing is acute and painful. Kaysen
					describes checks as like a “pulse,” a neverending reminder of life
					slipping away.

Confiscation of “sharps,” any possessions that the nurses
					deem potentially dangerous to the girls, further infantilizes the
					patients. The confiscations can be deeply personal, from graduation
					pins to favorite earrings, and even absurd, as in the removal of
					belts because of the spike in the buckle. The girls are both at
					the mercy of their guardians and profoundly dependent on them, unable
					to make any decisions without the consent of authority. This infantilization reaches
					its peak in the act of shaving. Kaysen can only use a razor on her
					legs in the presence of a nurse, who is only a few years older than she.
					The patients are humiliated by their state of confinement in the most
					personal aspects of their lives.

