Darius Grover Kellner  

A Persian fifteen-year-old and protagonist of the novel. Darius has thick, dark, curly hair, brown eyes, and a strong jawline. He loves Star Trek, Lord of the Rings, and hot tea, and feels like he is a disappointment to his father. He struggles with depression and with finding self-acceptance. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Darius Kellner

Stephen Kellner  

Darius’s father and an unwitting antagonist in the novel. Stephen is tall with short blond hair and blue eyes. Darius describes him as Aryan. A partner in an architecture firm, Stephen is often drawn into his work.  

Read an in-depth analysis of Stephen Kellner

Sohrab Rezaei  

A Baha’i teenager and neighbor of Mamou and Babou in Yazd. Sohrab is the same age as Darius. He is generous and empathetic with Darius despite his own struggles with his father’s incarceration. He loves to play soccer and dreams of being an architect. 

Shirin Kellner, née Bahrami  

Darius’s mother, a Persian woman. Shirin grew up in Iran and moved to America with the belief she would one day return to Yazd. A loving mother who speaks Farsi, Shirin works as a UX designer in Portland. 

Ardeshir Bahrami "Babou"  

Darius’s maternal grandfather. Ardeshir was once a strong and capable man, but a tumor has severely damaged his health. He has thick eyebrows, a mustache, and very calloused hands. Ardeshir is proud of his Persian culture. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Babou

Fariba Bahrami "Mamou"  

Darius’s maternal grandmother. Fariba Bahrami is a very short woman with huge, kind eyes. She cooks and takes care of her family. Though it is not conventional to be emotional among Persians, Mamou is very expressive with her feelings. 

Laleh Kellner 

Eight-year-old sister of Darius. Laleh is a talkative, energetic second-grade student with a lot of friends. Her confidence, vibrance, and closeness with their parents make her a foil to Darius, who nonetheless loves her immensely. Laleh has big blue eyes and is very close to Darius. She knows how to speak Farsi fluently. 

Trent “Fatty” Bolger 

A classmate who bullies Darius. Trent is a short, popular bully on the wrestling team whom Darius nicknames Fatty after the most boring Hobbit in Lord of the Rings. Trent calls Darius names and makes lots of dirty jokes about him. 

Cyprian “Chip” Cusumano  

A classmate of Darius and friend of Trent. Chip is taller, better-looking, and nicer than Trent, though also less popular. Chip is the only sophomore on the varsity wrestling team. 

Mr. Charles Apatan  

The manager of Tea Haven Shoppes at Fairview Court and Darius’s boss. Mr. Apatan is very literal and doesn't understand Darius’s humor. He is a short man originally from Manila who goes back to visit each year. He has strict rules about his teas that Darius often disagrees with. 

Javaneh Esfahani 

Darius's closest friend at school. Javaneh has olive-toned skin and looks very Persian. She wears a headscarf and sits with Darius at lunch. Because of her bravery, Darius calls her a lioness. She wants to see Iran, but her parents think it’s too dangerous. 

Jamsheed Bahrami 

Shirin’s oldest brother. Jamsheed has four kids. 

Soheil Bahrami  

Shirin’s other brother. Soheil has a wife and two sons. He looks like a younger Babou and lives in Shiraz. 

Ashkan Rezaei  

Amou, or uncle, of Sohrab. Ashkan runs a grocery store. He is a big, tall, hairy man with a crooked smile and a low, deep voice. He makes the best faludeh in Yazd. 

Ali-Reza  

A neighborhood boy in Yazd who plays soccer with Sohrab. Ali-Reza is a friend of Hossein and an aggressive player. He is meanspirited and prejudiced against Baha’is. 

Hossein 

A neighborhood boy in Yazd who plays soccer with Sohrab. Hossein is a friend of Ali-Reza. He is short with a unibrow and mustache. He has a deep voice and doesn't smile. 

Coach Henderson  

A soccer coach and father of Vance Henderson. Coach Henderson humiliates Darius for being slow on the soccer field after he begins taking medication for his depression. 

Coach Fortes 

A gym teacher and soccer coach at Chapel Hill High School. 

Dr. Howell 

Darius and Stephen’s doctor. Dr. Howell treats both Kellners for depression. 

Grandma and Oma  

Stephen Kellner's moms. 

