As the child hero of a melodramatic novel of social protest,
				Oliver Twist is meant to appeal more to our sentiments than to our
				literary sensibilities. On many levels, Oliver is not a believable
				character, because although he is raised in corrupt surroundings,
				his purity and virtue are absolute. Throughout the novel, Dickens
				uses Oliver’s character to challenge the Victorian idea that paupers
				and criminals are already evil at birth, arguing instead that a
				corrupt environment is the source of vice. At the same time, Oliver’s
				incorruptibility undermines some of Dickens’s assertions. Oliver
				is shocked and horrified when he sees the Artful Dodger and Charley Bates
				pick a stranger’s pocket and again when he is forced to participate
				in a burglary. Oliver’s moral scruples about the sanctity of property
				seem inborn in him, just as Dickens’s opponents thought that corruption
				is inborn in poor people. Furthermore, other pauper children use
				rough Cockney slang, but Oliver, oddly enough, speaks in proper
				King’s English. His grammatical fastidiousness is also inexplicable,
				as Oliver presumably is not well-educated. Even when he is abused
				and manipulated, Oliver does not become angry or indignant. When
				Sikes and Crackit force him to assist in a robbery, Oliver merely
				begs to be allowed to “run away and die in the fields.” Oliver does
				not present a complex picture of a person torn between good and
				evil—instead, he is goodness incarnate.

	Even if we might feel that Dickens’s social criticism
				would have been more effective if he had focused on a more complex
				poor character, like the Artful Dodger or Nancy, the audience for
				whom Dickens was writing might not have been receptive to such a
				portrayal. Dickens’s Victorian middle-class readers were likely
				to hold opinions on the poor that were only a little less extreme
				than those expressed by Mr. Bumble, the beadle who treats paupers
				with great cruelty. In fact, Oliver Twist was criticized
				for portraying thieves and prostitutes at all. Given the strict
				morals of Dickens’s audience, it may have seemed necessary for him
				to make Oliver a saintlike figure. Because Oliver appealed to Victorian
				readers’ sentiments, his story may have stood a better chance of
				effectively challenging their prejudices.

