Oedipus is remembered today largely in the context of
				the psychoanalytic theory of Sigmund Freud, as the mythic archetype
				of the allegedly universal psychic phenomenon that men unconsciously desire
				to kill their fathers and have sexual relations with their mothers.
				Regardless of the validity of Freud’s theory, it is important to note
				that the theory does not provide a wholly accurate description of
				the Oedipus of classical mythology. Indeed, Oedipus does end up killing
				his father and marrying his mother, but he does so entirely without
				awareness. It is interesting that Freud looks to Oedipus as an incarnation
				of a supposedly universal trait, as there is indeed much in the
				story of Oedipus that makes him resonate in universal ways. First,
				and most apparent, is the case of the riddle of the Sphinx, which
				Oedipus solves at the gates of Thebes. The Sphinx asks which creature
				walks on four feet in the morning, two at noon, and three in the
				evening. Oedipus’s answer is man, because man crawls as a baby,
				walks upright in maturity, and walks with a cane in old age. Perhaps
				the most direct and universal statement on the nature of man to
				be found in classical myth, this riddle retains its accuracy even
				today and still lies within our own power to answer.

Oedipus’s subtler universality is evident later, when
				he learns the incredible truth about his mother and father. In despair,
				he puts out his own eyes and leaves his city to wander and eventually
				die. This form of self-punishment is an unusual choice: while we
				imagine he might choose to kill himself like his mother or the Sphinx
				have, his choice to blind himself is a poignant statement on the
				human condition. In putting out his eyes, Oedipus creates an actual,
				physical manifestation of what he understands his condition as a
				human being to be—that we are often blind to our true fate and,
				as a result, do not know the consequences of our actions. Oedipus
				thus also acknowledges that fate guides our steps from birth to
				death, brooding over us however or wherever we wander through life.

