After a night of passionate lovemaking, Dagny and Rearden
					wake together. Rearden is angry and disgusted. He sees sex as a
					base and obscene impulse and believes both Dagny and he worthy of
					contempt. Dagny laughs in disagreement. She is proud to make love
					to him and share her desire with someone she respects. She tells
					him she makes no claims on him except that he come to her with his
					lowest physical desires. 

Jim meets Cherryl Brooks, a young, poor shopgirl who recognizes
					him from the newspapers. She thinks he is responsible for the success
					of the John Galt Line, and he allows her to believe it. Cherryl worships
					heroes and their accomplishments, and Jim enjoys the attention.
					He invites her to his apartment for a drink. She finds some of his
					comments odd, especially his contempt for Hank Rearden, whom she
					believes is a great man, but she is thrilled to be with him. 

Dagny and Rearden go away for a vacation together, driving around
					the countryside. Hoping to locate some scarce machine tools, they
					stop at the site of the Twentieth Century Motor Company manufacturing
					plant. They are shocked to find the plant not just closed, but ruined,
					and the town it supported in abject poverty. Inside the plant’s
					lab they find the remnants of a motor designed to run on static
					electricity. Its existence would revolutionize industrial production.
					They are determined to find the inventor and rebuild it. 

Wesley Mouch, recently promoted to top coordinator of
					the Bureau of Economic Planning and National Resources, issues a
					number of statements urging the use of emergency powers to balance
					the economy. The Union of Locomotive Engineers demands that the
					maximum speed of all trains be reduced to sixty miles an hour. The
					Union of Railway Conductors and Brakemen demands that the length
					of all freight trains be reduced to sixty cars. The states of Wyoming, New
					Mexico, Utah, and Arizona demand that the number of trains run in
					Colorado not exceed the number running in each of these neighboring
					states. A group headed by Orren Boyle demands the passage of a law
					limiting the production of Rearden Metal to an amount equal to the
					output of any other steel mill of equal capacity. Another group
					demands a law giving every customer who wants it an equal supply
					of Rearden Metal. Still another group seeks to prevent eastern businesses
					from moving out of state, hoping to stop the trend of businesses
					relocating to Colorado. Rearden finds that Paul Larkin did not deliver
					his supply of ore. He sent it to Orren Boyle instead (as a term
					of the deal arranged earlier by Jim Taggart). After this, Rearden
					begins to obtain ore through shady illegal deals, the only option
					left to him. 

Dagny’s search for the motor’s inventor leads her to Lee
					Hunsacker. He tells her that he purchased the factory from the heirs
					of Jed Starnes. He had asked Midas Mulligan, the richest man in
					the country, for a loan, but Mulligan had refused him. When Mulligan refused,
					Hunsacker filed suit against him. The judge in charge, Judge Narragansett,
					ruled for Mulligan, but Hunsacker appealed. A higher court ordered
					Mulligan to issue the loan based solely on Hunsacker’s “need” and
					despite his lack of ability or collateral. Instead of paying, Mulligan
					disappeared without a trace. Narragansett disappeared a few months
					later. When Dagny locates Starnes’s heirs, she discovers why the
					company fell apart. It had been run according to a radical plan
					in which workers were paid based only on their proclaimed needs,
					and those who worked hardest were required to support those who
					did not. The resulting chaos destroyed the company. Dagny finds
					the wife of William Hastings, the former chief engineer. She sends
					Dagny to find a man who she thinks would know the name of the inventor.
					Dagny finds him working as a cook in a Wyoming diner. He does know
					the inventor, but he will not give the name. Dagny is shocked to
					learn the cook is Hugh Akston, a famous philosopher who retired
					years ago. He gives her a mysterious cigarette stamped with the
					sign of the dollar. 

When Dagny returns to New York, she finds that every law
					the looters were seeking has been passed. A special tax has been imposed
					on the state of Colorado. Dagny tries to reach the defiant Ellis
					Wyatt, but when she gets to Colorado, she sees that he has set fire
					to his oil fields and disappeared. 

Dagny’s rejection of Rearden’s critical view of sex reflects
					Rand’s attitude that the mind and body cannot be separated. Rearden
					sees the achievements of the mind as noble but the desires of the
					body as base and unrelated to the mind. In contrast, Dagny (like
					Rand) sees the desires of the body stemming naturally from the rational
					mind. Dagny desires Rearden precisely because her mind perceives
					the value of his great accomplishments, and she knows he chooses
					her for the same reasons. Therefore, she sees sex as a grand expression of
					the values they represent to each other, not as a shameful impulse. Rearden
					must learn to integrate the mind and body if he is to be released
					from his self-made bonds.

Jim and Cherryl’s romance is entirely different. Cherryl
					chooses Jim because of the values she thinks he represents, but
					she is wrong about him. Jim chooses Cherryl out of his need to destroy.
					Although he claims to have noble, altruistic goals and a desire
					to help the “little guy,” his true nature is to destroy the efforts
					and aspirations of others. The young hero-worshipper is easy prey,
					much easier to destroy than Dagny, Rearden, or Francisco. However,
					neither Jim nor Cherryl are aware of his nature—yet. 

When she discovers the remnants of the motor, Dagny has
					a new motivating purpose in the story. With its potential to revolutionize not
					only the transportation industry, but every industry, Dagny knows
					the motor could save a crumbling society. Finding its inventor and
					rebuilding it gradually become even more important than saving her
					railroad. Also, the motor represents the concept of motive power.
					It can power a society, just as a locomotive engine can power a
					train. In Ayn Rand’s philosophy, the mind, fueled by rational thought,
					is the motive power that fuels man’s existence. 

The new laws demonstrate the absurdity of socialism in
					action. There is no way the businesses affected by them can possibly
					survive in the long term if they are to follow the rules. For example,
					if Taggart must run fewer, shorter, and slower trains through Colorado,
					it will lose money through increased operating costs and lower shipping
					fees. Meanwhile, the Colorado businesses will not be able to ship
					their goods efficiently because they will face a shortage of trains,
					and they will lose money as well. Meanwhile, Rearden cannot possibly
					meet the demands of the new laws. One requires him to limit his
					output of Rearden Metal, while another requires him to sell a “fair
					share” of Rearden Metal to everyone who requests it, regardless
					of output. Rand demonstrates how a society that controls its economy
					through harsh regulations eventually creates new criminals by creating
					new crimes. Rearden is made a criminal under one set of laws to
					meet the requirements of another. To the rational mind, these outcomes
					are obvious, but since the looters have rejected reason and rationality,
					they cannot see the long-term issues.

The story of Lee Hunsacker, Midas Mulligan, and Judge
					Narragansett further illustrates the irrational nature of socialist
					laws and offers some clues about the motives of the men who have
					disappeared. Although he had believed he was following noble socialist ideals,
					the judge who overturned Narragansett’s ruling created an impossibly
					absurd situation. By ordering Mulligan to issue a loan to Hunsacker
					precisely because of Hunsacker’s need and, more importantly, his
					inability to repay it, the judge had allowed the doctrine of need
					to triumph over reason. In response to this, Mulligan and Narragansett
					have retired and disappeared, just like the industrialists. Dagny
					gets more clues to the motives behind the disappearances when she
					finds Hugh Akston. He retired because he could no longer practice
					as a philosopher. Since his philosophy is the philosophy of reason,
					only reason could have pulled him away from the world. To live in
					the world as Dagny and Rearden live—under the yoke of weak, malicious
					men—presented to Akston and the others some fundamental logical
					contradiction. Though its full nature has not yet been revealed,
					the force at work among the nation’s vanishing industrialists may
					simply be the force of reason.

