The protagonist of the novel. Iris is reserved and secretive and often does not reveal her true beliefs and feelings. As an eldest child, she has always been expected to shoulder significant responsibility within her family, and this leads her to feel that she needs to keep the peace and make everyone happy. In fact, Iris’s desire to conform and please can make her passive and unable to play a proactive role in her own life. Iris says she is the true author of the novel within a novel titled The Blind Assassin.

Read an in-depth analysis of Iris Chase Griffen

Iris’s younger sister. Laura has very strong convictions and cares more about integrity than social appearances. Laura can be dreamy, artistic, and impulsive. She tends to follow her heart and is willing to take large risks. Laura is always concerned with helping others and trying to make the world a better place. Laura is the named author of the novel within a novel titled The Blind Assassin.

Read an in-depth analysis of Laura Chase

Iris’s husband. Richard is a wealthy and ruthless businessman who will stop at nothing to gain money and power. He is cold and abusive toward Iris and is willing to blackmail Laura in order to coerce her into having sex with him. Richard is deeply preoccupied with his reputation and public appearance because he believes that maintaining appearances is what will allow him to gain the political power he aspires to have.

Read an in-depth analysis of Richard Griffen

Richard’s sister, and Iris’s sister-in-law. Winifred is a cold and cruel woman who cares solely about maintaining wealth, status, and influence over her brother. She does not care about the well-being of Laura or Iris and is willing to help her brother cover up his abusive behavior.

Read an in-depth analysis of Winifred Griffen Prior

Iris’s lover. Alex holds radical political views and has lived much of his life as a drifter. He does not have any close relationships until he begins to have an affair with Iris. Alex can be sarcastic and even cruel. He is not shy about voicing his opinions and advocating for what he believes to be right. Alex is also complex and contradictory because even though he endorses a Communist political philosophy, he cannot help falling in love with a wealthy woman.

Iris’s father. Norval takes over his father’s business even though he initially had dreams of becoming a lawyer and politician. Norval is physically scarred and emotionally traumatized by his experiences fighting in World War I. As a result, he becomes emotionally withdrawn, unfaithful, and addicted to alcohol. Norval is also somewhat naïve and ends up getting tricked by Richard Griffen.

Norval’s wife, and the mother of Iris and Laura. Liliana is a devoted wife who always tries to do her best even when her husband mistreats her. She is physically frail and is not good at standing up for herself. Liliana is interested in trying to help others and make the world a better place, even though she does not have much control over her own life.

Initially presented as the daughter of Richard and Iris, but eventually revealed to be the daughter of Alex and Iris. Aimee grows up lonely and confused because she knows that there is something mysterious about her family, but she can never figure out what it is. Aimee eventually turns to drugs and alcohol as a way to cope with her pain and loneliness.

Aimee’s daughter, and Iris’s granddaughter. Sabrina is a free-spirit who is interested in travel and making the world a better place.

Iris’s grandfather, and Norval’s father. Benjamin is the founder of the Chase family business. He is a hard-working man with simple tastes. He wants to ensure that his family is powerful and well-regarded, and it is very important to him that his legacy lives on.

Iris’s grandmother, wife to Benjamin, and mother of Norval. Adelia is more glamourous and cosmopolitan than her husband and makes it her life’s work to elevate the social standing of the Chase family. She is very interested in beauty, art and aesthetics.

A woman who lives in Port Ticonderoga and informally plays the role of caregiver to the elderly Iris. Myra’s fate has been entangled with that of the Chase family since before her birth, and as a result, she is staunchly loyal to Iris. Myra can be overbearing and a busybody, but she is very kind and caring toward Iris, even when Iris does not always return her kindness.

Myra’s husband. Out of loyalty and devotion to his wife, Walter also helps Iris. He is quiet and not particularly sophisticated, but he is always willing to lend a helping hand and be part of the community.

The housekeeper and nursemaid to the Chase family. When Iris and Laura are children, Reenie functions as a kind of surrogate mother to them. Reenie is sharp-tongued, critical, and blunt. She has very strong ideas about what is socially appropriate behavior. Reenie is also very protective of the two Chase girls, and she is often the only one to look out for their well-being.

A sculptor who becomes Norval’s mistress. Callista is independent, free-spirited, and progressive in her political beliefs. Nonetheless, she is seduced by the wealth and luxurious lifestyle that a relationship with Norval offers her.

A tutor who is hired to teach Laura and Iris when the girls are adolescents. He is a predatory figure who exploits the trust of the family and is also a very harsh disciplinarian.

