Copper shortages make repairs impossible for Taggart.
					Under the Unification Plan, crucial materials are diverted to businessmen
					with Washington influence. The problem worsens when, at the precise moment
					that they were to be nationalized, the mines and properties of d’Anconia
					copper are blown up, and Francisco and his best employees disappear. 

Rearden’s brother Philip asks him for a job, but Rearden
					refuses, since Philip has no useful skills. He is surprised at Philip’s
					sudden interest. Later, the Wet Nurse also asks for a job, wanting
					to finally do something productive. Though Rearden would like to
					hire him, the laws will not allow it. The Wet Nurse warns Rearden
					that the Washington men are working on new restrictions and secretly bringing
					their own men into the mills. 

Despite terrible conditions, the farmers of Minnesota
					have generated a huge wheat crop and need trains to carry it off.
					Dagny learns that Taggart’s cars have been diverted by the corrupt
					Cuffy Meigs to Louisiana, where they are used to carry soybeans
					for an experimental project run by the mother of a politician. The
					cars cannot be rerouted in time, and the wheat crop rots, guaranteeing
					starvation for many. The farming businesses in Minnesota are all
					destroyed. 

The traffic system in the Taggart terminal has short-circuited. While
					dealing with the emergency, Dagny sees John Galt among the workers.
					Later, she walks off into the tunnels. He follows, and they make
					passionate love. Afterwards, he tells her he has been watching her
					for ten years from these very tunnels. He warns her not to look for
					him. If she were to lead the looters to him, he might be killed.

Rearden’s union steelworkers ask for a raise, but Rearden
					is never told. The Unification Board rejects their request. Later,
					the Board-controlled newspapers publish stories of the hardship
					of the steelworkers and the unfair denial of their raise, without
					mentioning who denied it. Later, Rearden receives notice that his
					accounts will be attached to pay for phony back taxes. He does nothing,
					waiting to see what the looters are up to. He receives a phone call
					from a bureaucrat named Tinky Holloway, who asks him to attend a
					meeting to straighten everything out. Rearden agrees to attend.
					Holloway believes Rearden is intractable, based on Philip Rearden’s report
					on his recent visit to his brother. 

Rearden’s family summons him to the house and pleads with
					him not to disappear. He rejects their apologies and their cries
					for pity. By asking him to remain, they are asking him to sacrifice
					himself for them, and this is unforgivable to him. In a pathetic
					attempt to destroy him, Lillian confesses her infidelity with Jim,
					but Rearden is beyond caring. When his family points out that he
					cannot disappear without money, he realizes why the attachment orders
					were placed. 

Rearden goes to the meeting to straighten out his situation.
					Jim Taggart, Wesley Mouch, and several other looters are also there. They
					inform Rearden that they are passing a Steel Unification Plan, designed
					to pool profits like the Railroad Plan. He replies that under the
					plan, Orren Boyle would make the bulk of profits and he would go
					bankrupt no matter how much steel he made. Rearden suddenly grasps
					the nature of their game. Their entire system is based on the knowledge
					that he will always continue working, at any cost, because he loves
					his work and he is good at it. 

When Rearden returns to the mill, a riot begun by government thugs
					is already underway. The Wet Nurse has been shot after refusing
					to help the goons enter the mills. He dies in Rearden’s arms. Rearden
					is hit on the head and collapses, but an unknown worker kills his
					attacker and organizes the workers to defend themselves. Later, Rearden
					learns this worker is Francisco d’Anconia, who has been secretly
					working in the mills since he destroyed d’Anconia Copper. 

Rand sets up a contrast between the two job seekers who
					appeal to Rearden. His brother Philip expects a job because he is
					Rearden’s brother and therefore his responsibility, at least in
					a society that endorses the idea that men are “their brother’s keepers.”
					But mostly Philip expects one because he claims to need it, and
					need is the only qualification a socialist society requires. Rearden
					is vehement in rejecting Philip’s request and suspicious of his
					motives. His suspicion is warranted, as it is later revealed that
					Philip is a stooge for the looters. On the other end of
					the spectrum, when the Wet Nurse asks for a job, even as a menial
					laborer, he does so because he wants to produce instead of living
					off the producers. He has been transformed by his experience in
					the mills and has come to reject his earlier beliefs. In this respect,
					he is alone among the looters. Furthermore, he does not assume Rearden
					will simply give him a job. 

The looters have traveled so far down the path of power
					and influence that they have lost sight of issues of life and death
					and cannot see beyond the moment. This fact is dramatically illustrated
					by the ruin of the wheat crop in Minnesota. The starvation that
					will result will kill many, but the looters fail to see the impact
					on themselves. Their short-sightedness is astonishing and deeply
					irrational. As long as they are able to maintain their power today,
					they are willing to risk tomorrow and allow society to return to
					a pre-industrial Dark Age. Believing they have Rearden right where
					they want him, the looters move in for the kill. Yet even as they
					seek to destroy his business (and prop up Orren Boyle’s) with the
					Steel Unification Plan, they need him to continue to produce. The
					attachments to his accounts are designed to keep him from leaving
					by cutting off his access to money, but they don’t know he has Danneskjold’s
					gold. Besides, Rearden can no longer be touched. He is unaffected
					by the looters’ efforts and by the appeals of his pathetic family.
					He is especially untouched by Lillian’s confession of her infidelity
					with Jim. His lack of interest in the news negates her life’s purpose
					of destroying him, and she is devastated. 

The government-staged riot at Rearden’s mills, like Project
					X, reveals the brute force supporting the looters’ regime and finally allows
					Rearden to give up and join Francisco. The violence is designed
					to ease the way for a government takeover of the company, which
					would appear to be for Rearden’s own protection. In the battle,
					the Wet Nurse is sacrificed, but at least he has fought on the side of
					good. After his death, Rearden is finished. He can no longer participate
					in the looters’ world and lend his mind to their system. He is ready
					to join Francisco and the strikers. Francisco has always been Rearden’s
					friend and protector, even when he appeared to be his enemy. Now,
					Rearden knows his instincts about Francisco have been right all
					along. Their friendship is based on shared values and mutual admiration
					and forms a model for the types of relationships Rand believed were
					possible in a truly rational world. Rearden and Francisco have something
					else in common as well. Both have loved Dagny—and both have lost
					her. 

