The students prepare for their first trip to Hogsmeade.
					Ginny brings Harry a parchment from Dumbledore arranging their next
					lesson. The students set out into the terrible weather, bundled
					up in cloaks and scarves. On their way to the Three Broomsticks,
					a local pub, Harry runs into Mundungus. Mundungus is struggling
					with a pile of items, and Harry notices that some of Mundungus’s
					things belong to Sirius. Harry is outraged and poised to attack,
					but Tonks appears and stops Harry from doing so, thereby preventing
					him from committing a grave breach of Magical Law. Harry, Ron, and Hermione
					enter the pub and order a round of drinks. They agree that the day
					has been a waste and decide to head back to Hogwarts, following
					Katie Bell and a friend out of the bar and into the cold sleet.

Katie is holding a package, which her friend, Leanne,
					tries to grab from her hands. Katie grabs it back and suddenly shoots
					up six feet into the air, screaming in pain. Harry, Ron, and Hermione
					run forward to help, pulling Katie from the air. Harry runs toward
					Hogwarts for help, encountering Hagrid along the way. Hagrid scoops up
					Katie and dashes toward the school. Leanne explains that Katie came
					back from the bathroom at the Three Broomsticks holding the package
					and told Leanne it was a surprise for somebody at Hogwarts and she
					had to deliver it. Katie had refused to say who had given her the
					package. When Katie and Leanne fought over the package, it accidentally
					opened and the silver and opal necklace inside was exposed. Harry
					recognizes the necklace from Borgin and Burkes. He brings it to
					Professor McGonagall, who orders the Hogwarts groundskeeper, Filch,
					to deliver it to Snape. Harry tells McGonagall that he believes
					Draco Malfoy gave Katie the necklace. McGonagall is extremely doubtful
					of Harry’s theory and informs him that Draco was in detention with
					her all day.

Katie is moved to St. Mungo’s for further treatment. Harry reports
					to Dumbledore’s office for their next lesson. They enter the Pensieve,
					this time rooting through the memory of Caractacus Burke, the co-owner
					of Borgin and Burkes. Harry and Dumbledore see Caractacus talking
					about Merope’s gold locket, claiming that he bought it from her
					for ten Galleons, an amount far below the locket’s actual value.
					Clearly, Caractacus took advantage of Merope’s desperation. When
					Harry asks Dumbledore why Merope didn’t use her magic to get food
					and shelter, Dumbledore explains that he thinks Merope was so devastated
					by Tom’s desertion that she either chose to stop using magic altogether
					or found her powers drained by her sadness.

Next, Harry and Dumbledore enter one of Dumbledore’s memories.
					A much younger Dumbledore approaches the door of an orphanage and
					asks to speak with the house matron, Mrs. Cole. When she arrives,
					Dumbledore explains that he is here to offer Tom Marvolo Riddle
					a place at his school. Mrs. Cole warns Dumbledore that Tom Riddle
					is a funny boy, and Dumbledore is not surprised. Tom regularly bullies
					the other children, killing one child’s pet rabbit and leading two
					other children into a cave at the seaside. After emerging from the
					cave, the two are never the same again. Mrs. Cole leads Dumbledore
					to Tom, who is handsome. Dumbledore introduces himself, but Tom
					is suspicious until Dumbledore tells him that Hogwarts is a school
					for magic. Tom is excited, but rude and belligerent, demanding that
					Dumbledore prove himself. In response, Dumbledore sets Tom’s wardrobe
					on fire with a flick of his wand.

Dumbledore puts out the flames and asks Tom to retrieve
					a box from inside his wardrobe full of things Tom has stolen from
					his fellow orphans. Dumbledore demands that he return them before enrolling
					at Hogwarts. Dumbledore offers to accompany Tom to Diagon Alley
					to purchase his school supplies, but Tom insists on going by himself.
					Tom also tells Dumbledore that he dislikes his name because it is
					too common. Harry and Dumbledore return to Hogwarts. On his way
					out of Dumbledore’s office, Harry notices that Marvolo’s ring is
					gone.

Harry is still mourning the murder of his godfather, Sirius.
					Sirius was Harry’s only living relative, chosen as his godfather
					by his parents, James and Lily Potter. He was killed at the Ministry
					of Magic a year ago while trying to protect Harry. In many ways,
					Harry feels responsible for Sirius’s death. At this point, every
					one of Harry’s family members has been killed trying to protect
					him. Harry cannot help but blame himself for Sirius even being at
					the Ministry in the first place, since it was Harry who led the
					Order of the Phoenix into Voldemort’s trap. Consequently, the sight
					of Mundungus, who is notorious for pilfering other people’s possessions
					and selling them on the black market, juggling Sirius’s belongings
					is unbearably hurtful to Harry. Harry is not necessarily upset that
					Mundungus has stolen Harry’s inheritance, as he cares very little
					about the material worth of Sirius’s belongings. However, Harry
					is devastated that Sirius’s things, Harry’s last connection to his
					murdered godfather, are being treated with disrespect and carelessly
					tossed around.

Although Harry allowed himself a small bit of time in
					which to grieve, he is clearly not entirely recovered from the shock
					and hurt of Sirius’s death, and he harbors a great deal of anger,
					directed both at himself and at Voldemort, about the events of that
					fateful night at the Ministry. Overcome with rage, Harry cannot
					control himself, and he raises his wand to attack. It is one of
					few moments in the series when readers see Harry acting maliciously
					and carelessly. Although Harry is often rash, he is rarely hurtful.
					In response to Harry’s raised wand, Tonks reappears. Once again,
					it seems obvious that Tonks has been ordered by Dumbledore to keep
					Harry out of trouble. This is the second time she has mysteriously
					appeared to rescue Harry from his own lack of foresight. Thankfully,
					Tonks is able to prevent Harry from risking his own life by breaking
					Magical Law.

Once again, Harry tries to implicate Draco Malfoy in the
					cursing of Katie Bell. Harry is absolutely certain that Draco must
					be involved in the plot, and his suspicions do not seem to dissipate, even
					after Professor McGonagall explains to Harry that Draco had never
					been to Hogsmeade, having spent the entire day in detention. Draco
					has a clear alibi, but Harry still insists that he had something to
					do with the cursed necklace. We may infer that Harry’s urge to implicate
					Draco has much to do with Draco’s father, Lucius Malfoy, who fought
					Harry at the Ministry on the same night Sirius was killed. Harry’s
					inability to get over Sirius’s death no doubt colors his treatment
					of Draco.

Harry and Dumbledore’s next trip into the Pensieve is
					enormously revealing. By observing Tom Riddle as a young man, before he
					transforms into Lord Voldemort, Harry is able to make important
					inferences about his character, and Dumbledore gently guides him
					to these conclusions. Tom is not a pleasant young man, and not particularly
					sympathetic, but he is also an orphan, like Harry, and Harry no
					doubt feels a certain kinship with Tom’s situation. Each of Tom’s
					reactions to Dumbledore’s news that he is a wizard and invited to
					enroll in Hogwarts is extremely telling. Dumbledore tells Harry
					to remember how Tom did not like his given name and showed enormous
					contempt for anything that marked him as ordinary. That disdain
					for the ordinary is also a big part of his glee at finding out that
					he is a wizard and has magical abilities, because having such abilities
					immediately marks him as different from his peers at the orphanage.
					Dumbledore also points out that Tom was highly self-sufficient,
					secretive, and friendless. Tom even enjoyed collecting trophies
					of his destructive behavior.

