The following day, Daphne goes to Simon’s Hastings House property in London. Her family is confused as to why she’s returned to London without Simon, but Daphne doesn’t tell anyone what happened between them. When Daphne’s period is three weeks late, she writes a letter to Simon explaining that she is pregnant. When Anthony finds out that Daphne is at Hastings House without Simon, he visits Daphne and says that he is furious at Simon for abandoning her. Anthony says that he will deliver Daphne’s letter to Simon and reassures her that he won’t kill him. Anthony travels to Simon’s property in the country and confronts him. Simon tells that Anthony that he couldn’t possibly understand what’s happened between himself and Daphne. Anthony then informs Simon that people are gossiping about Daphne’s solitary status in London and says that he’d better sort himself out and return to Daphne. After Anthony leaves, Simon reads Daphne’s letter and makes plans to go to London.

When Simon arrives at Hastings House, his butler informs him that Daphne is out riding in the park. Simon is incredulous, as he knows it’s dangerous for pregnant women to ride horses. Simon rides out to find Daphne, and when Daphne turns to see who is following her, she runs into a branch and falls off her horse. 

Simon makes sure Daphne is alright before asking why she thought it was a good idea to go horseback riding while pregnant. Daphne explains that her period started two days ago and that she isn’t pregnant after all. Simon tells her that he wants her back and says that he only left because when he had started to stutter during their fight, it brought back all of his childhood insecurities. Daphne assures him that he is not the boy his father thought he was and says that he needs to let go of the resentment he feels. Daphne asks if Simon ever considered whether he wanted a family, and Simon answers that his hatred toward his father has been the sole driving force in his life, motivating him to overcome his stutter and be successful in his own right. Daphne assures Simon that he would have been successful regardless of his father, and says that as long as they love each other, they can be happy together.

Daphne and Simon return to Hastings House to find the Bridgerton brothers waiting for them. They say that they won’t leave until they’re convinced that Simon loves Daphne and will treat her well. Daphne tells them that they need to let her fight her own battles. Simon tells Daphne that he loves her, and they kiss. When they realize that her brothers are still standing there, Simon demands that they leave his house. Afterward, Simon tells Daphne that he meant what he said. They go upstairs and have sex, and this time Simon doesn’t pull away. Daphne asks if he is sure, and he confirms that he is. 

Later, Daphne tells Simon that it’s fine if he doesn’t feel ready to be a father yet. Simon admits that he isn’t sure how to feel about it, but he knows that he no longer wants to make decisions just to spite his father. However, Simon admits that he’s concerned they will have a child who stutters like he did. Daphne assures him that they will love any children they have and help them any way they can. Later, Daphne remembers the letters she has from Simon’s father. Simon tells her he doesn’t want to read them now but that he might read them someday.

Four years later, an announcement appears in Lady Whistledown’s Society Papers that the Duke and Duchess of Hastings have had a baby boy. The anonymous author speculates that because they named their daughters Amelia, Belinda, and Carolyn, the boy’s name will begin with a D and might be David. Simon wonders how Lady Whistledown could have known the baby’s name even though he and Daphne haven’t told anyone yet and worries that the gossip writer has a spy in their household. Daphne tells Simon not to worry about it. She hands the infant to Simon, who promises David that he will love him no matter what.

Throughout the novel, both spoken and written words carry tremendous power, as evidenced most notably by excerpts from Lady Whistledown’s Society Papers, which hold the potential to make or break reputations. The words “vow” and “promise” are used repeatedly to signify momentous action. When Anthony tells Daphne he vowed to kill Simon if he hurt Daphne’s soul, he communicates that he’s prepared to act on that vow until Daphne assures her brother that her soul has not been damaged. In spite of Anthony’s anger, Daphne believes his promise not to hurt Simon or read her letter, demonstrating the power of one’s word. Here, when Simon ponders the reason he left Daphne at Clyvedon, it is not his anger at her or his fear of being a father; rather, he realizes he flees because her actions caused him to stutter and to recall feelings of powerlessness that were so prevalent during his childhood. Simon’s self-hatred suggests how deeply he is impacted by the inability to express himself eloquently. Whether through their meaning, their release, or their suppression, words hold the power for great impact.

In the book’s final chapters, love appears to triumph over anger and pain. Simon’s refusal to have a child to spite his father shows the depth of his hatred and anger. But as he shares his feelings with Daphne, she insists he will be happy if he decides not to let anger or spite guide him any longer. When the couple arrives back in London to find Daphne’s brothers in their home asking for a guarantee of Simon’s love, Simon’s ability to overlook this invasion of privacy reveals his understanding that their actions are driven by love for her and not by anger at him, and that love is a greater motivator than hate. Simon later tells Daphne he loves her for the first time then takes her to bed, suggesting he has indeed decided to let go of his anger.

