Maiguru is a complex, often contradictory, and multilayered character who
				grows increasingly concerned about the development of her children and their
				responses to the various cultural traditions, both Western and African, with
				which they have been raised. Her fears and anxieties are rooted in her own
				experience of trying to reconcile attitudes and behaviors that come from two
				very different worlds. Her conflicting attitudes suggest the deep divide that
				exists in her perception of herself as a woman and as an African. When the
				family returns to Rhodesia, Maiguru wishes her children to retain the mark of
				distinction and difference that they have achieved from living in a Western
				society. She defends the fact that they have lost their ability to communicate
				fluently in Shona, their native tongue. After the family has settled back into
				life in Rhodesia, Maiguru’s reactions and attitudes change, and she grows
				concerned at how Anglicized her children have become. Only when her daughter is
				severely ailing in the final stages of the novel does she realize the dire
				consequences of these conflicting cultural pressures that have been placed on
				her children.

When the family returns to the homestead for the holidays, Maiguru, highly
				educated and accustomed to earning her own living as an educator, is reduced to
				a traditional role as domestic drudge. During subsequent holidays, Maiguru
				refuses to attend the celebrations. Even more boldly, Maiguru confronts her
				husband about her lack of respect and recognition in the family, an action that
				leads to the even bolder move of her leaving the house altogether. Although she
				returns to the family fold, Maiguru has evolved into a realistic model of modern
				womanhood for the young girls in her care. She represents a subtle but emerging
				voice of feminist dissent, a woman ahead of her time who attempts to enact
				change in gradual and realizable ways.

