I want me a whole gallona ice cream.

Grant goes to the courthouse to see Jefferson. Paul reluctantly searches
					the package of food for Jefferson. When Grant enters Jefferson’s
					cell, the conversation goes much better this time. Grant asks Jefferson
					if he would like anything, and Jefferson responds that he would
					like a gallon of vanilla ice cream to make up for the rest of his life,
					when he never got enough ice-cream. Jefferson likes Grant’s offer
					to bring him a little radio.

	Grant borrows money from people at the Rainbow Club.
					He goes to a little store uptown to buy a small radio. The white
					sales clerk wants to give Grant the floor model instead of a brand
					new radio, but Grant stands his ground and the clerk caves in. Grant takes
					the radio to the courthouse, receives the sheriff’s permission to give
					it to Jefferson, and gives the radio to Paul to deliver to Jefferson.

When Miss Emma, Tante Lou, and Reverend Ambrose go to
					see Jefferson, they have to visit him in his cell because Jefferson
					refuses to leave his radio. They find him lying down on his bunk,
					staring at the wall and listening to music. He does not say a word.
					When they return home, Tante Lou blames Grant for the problem. Reverend Ambrose
					says that the radio is a sinful influence on Jefferson. Grant becomes
					furious. Last Friday was the first time Jefferson had ever opened
					up to him, and Grant refuses to take the radio away from Jefferson
					and potentially undo whatever progress he has made.

	Grant goes back to see Jefferson. He brings a big bag
					of nuts that his students gathered for Jefferson. When Grant asks
					Jefferson to meet Miss Emma in the dayroom next time, Jefferson
					consents. Grant offers to bring Jefferson a little notebook so that
					he can write down any thoughts that come to his mind, and Jefferson
					agrees to the plan. As Grant leaves, Jefferson asks him with some
					hesitation to thank the children for the nuts. Grant is overjoyed,
					and he feels as if he has found religion. Stifling his impulse to
					hug Jefferson, Grant squeezes Jefferson’s hand kindly and leaves.

I want you to show them the difference
						between what they think you are and what you can be.

Grant joins Miss Emma on her next visit to Jefferson,
					bringing along a notebook and pencil. In the dayroom, Jefferson
					refuses to eat at first. Grant asks Jefferson to walk with him around
					the room. As they walk, Grant tells Jefferson that a hero does something
					other men do not do or cannot do. Grant says that he (Grant) is
					not a hero, but that Jefferson can be a hero. Grant tells Jefferson
					about the white myth that black people are not human. Grant says
					he cannot stand up to defy whites, and that the reverend will not
					stand up to defy them, but Jefferson can do it. Grant tells Jefferson
					that he needs him more than Jefferson needs Grant. As Grant speaks,
					Jefferson cries quietly at his side, and Grant begins to cry too. 

Grant’s experience in the department store shows how a
					racist society is racist even in its smallest interactions. Black
					citizens must depend on the caprices of whites, and if whites, such
					as the saleswoman who waits on Grant, do not feel like being fair,
					black people have no recourse. Although black people are no longer
					physically enslaved, in many ways, they are spiritually enslaved.
					Grant’s refusal to bow down to the saleswoman’s shoddy treatment
					represents a victory for him. He insists that she give him a new
					radio, and in the end she agrees. This turn of events does not seem
					like an immense victory, but it is an important one. Gaines suggests
					that the cunning evil of racism is the way it pervades daily life
					and begins to seem normal. Tiny moments that make black people feel
					second-class add up to total oppression. Refusing to tolerate even
					minor shoddy treatment makes a difference.

	In these chapters, Jefferson begins to take steps toward
					recovering his dignity by voicing and acting upon personal desires.
					He admits to Grant that he wants ice cream and consents to write
					his thoughts down in a notebook. A few days later, he asks Grant
					to thank his students for their efforts. These may seem like minor
					incidents, but they mark the end of Jefferson’s isolation. Until
					this point, he has refused to admit wanting anything. Since acknowledging
					his intelligent desires is a human action, Jefferson seems to be
					relinquishing his tendency to deny his humanity. Now he reclaims
					his humanity by admitting he wants things and by thinking of others’ feelings.
					The fact that Jefferson weeps following Grant’s eloquent appeal
					for Jefferson’s heroic strength shows that he has begun to listen
					to and internalize Grant’s thoughts and feelings.

Both Grant and Jefferson go through pivotal changes as
					they walk around the room. In contrast to his previous wild behavior, now
					Jefferson listens carefully to Grant’s words, looking up when asked
					to do so. He weeps as Grant talks, showing that Grant’s words have
					affected him. In contrast to Grant’s usual cynicism, depression,
					and disconnectedness, here he talks in emotional and straightforward
					language. To Jefferson, he speaks the raw emotions of his heart
					as he never speaks them to other people. He tells Jefferson of his
					own shame, his own failings, his own need for a hero. He admits
					he has always wanted to run from responsibility and has squandered
					his chance to make changes. He stops expressing anger at his family
					and fellow black community members and starts expressing anger at
					his society. Grant’s honesty and his inspiring words begin
					to convince Jefferson that he can stop acting like an animal and
					regain his dignity. If Jefferson and Grant have clashed in the past, now
					they become united in working toward one goal. Gaines stresses this
					unification with the image of the two men walking together. 

