Grief, Didion tells us, is never quite what we expect.
					Though we know that the people close to us will die, we don’t look
					beyond the days or weeks immediately following their deaths. We
					expect to be crazy and inconsolable, but we don’t imagine that we
					will be “literally crazy,” as Didion terms it, believing that we
					have the power to bring a lost loved one back. We expect that the
					funeral will be the greatest test of our strength, when in fact
					the funeral is soothing, thanks to the comfort of others and the
					meaningful nature of the event. The test comes in the weeks and
					months following, when the mourning person must face a profound
					loneliness and sense of meaninglessness, and must do so alone. As
					a child, Didion had been fearful of the idea of meaninglessness
					and found comfort in geology. The shifting and changing patterns
					of the earth seemed inevitable and permanent, a notion Didion linked
					to the Episcopal saying, “As it was in the beginning, is now and
					ever shall be, world without end.” For Didion, the earth’s abiding
					indifference was a comfort. While the destruction of human life
					might cause personal sorrow, the world would always continue. After
					she married and had a child, Didion found further comfort in domestic
					routines, such as cooking meals and setting the table.

People dealing with grief think a great deal about self-pity,
					Didion asserts. Self- pity, though common, is a practice almost
					universally condemned by society. Didion had spent nearly all of
					her time with John after they married, and her frequent impulse
					to talk to him didn’t go away after he died. With no one to share
					her thoughts with, she turns into herself, and that intense self-focus
					leads naturally to self-pity. Though some people who have experienced
					loss claim to feel the presence of the deceased, Didion never does.
					On several occasions after John dies, she speaks to him as if he
					were there, but she knows that, as a writer, imagining their dialogue comes
					naturally to her. However, as she imagines the responses he might
					give to her questions, Didion realizes that, while she thought she
					knew all of John’s thoughts, she really only knew a fraction of them.
					Before his death, John frequently told her that if something happened
					to him she should stay in their apartment, keep her friends close,
					and marry again within the year. But neither John nor Didion really
					understood the implications of John’s command, as both were incapable
					of imagining life without the other. Didion says “marriage is time,”
					referring to the significance of their shared history. It is also,
					she says, “the denial of time,” because since she was twenty-nine
					Didion had always seen herself through John’s eyes. Now she must
					see herself through other people’s eyes, and it makes her feel considerably
					older. In death, she says, we mourn not only the loss of the loved
					one but also the loss of ourselves.

Didion has begun to take stock of the past year and now
					attempts to understand and draw a set of coherent conclusions from
					her experiences. She realizes that the intensity of the shock she
					felt at John’s death and her subsequent deranged reactions were
					not only caused by the suddenness of her intense loss, but also
					because she was jarred to realize that her expectations about grief
					had been so misguided. On the surface, she had been able to function
					without breaking down or becoming hysterical. In reality, she had
					temporarily been mentally ill, able to press on only because she
					deluded herself into thinking that she could bring John back. Didion
					had not only been shocked by grief, but also by her reaction to
					her own grief.

In dealing with John’s absence, Didion realizes how much
					she communicated with him on a daily basis and how all that energy
					has now been turned inward. This intense level of self-focus might
					also be called self-pity, she worries. However, this powerful self-concern is
					an inevitable consequence of losing someone with whom she shared
					such a strong, unique bond. Didion is not only coping with the loss
					of John, but also with the loss of their shared memory. Her sense
					of self had been largely founded on her relationship—not because
					she lacked a strong identity of her own, but because their emotional,
					intellectual, creative, social, domestic, and daily lives were so
					bound together. The loss of John forces Didion to evaluate who she
					is without him, a daunting task, since she has not thought of herself
					in that way for forty years. Didion’s general reluctance to engage
					in behavior she deems indulgent makes her attempt to understand
					herself as an individual separate from John feel like an act of
					“self-pity,” but it is a necessary part of the healing process.

When Didion discusses meaninglessness, she isn’t talking
					about an absence of meaning. Instead, she describes a way of looking
					at the world with a proper sense of perspective, acknowledging that personal
					tragedy seems insignificant when compared to massive geological
					shifts. Changes that can seem huge or overwhelming seem small when
					viewed within a broader perspective. Didion recalls how the indifference
					of the natural world served as a comfort to Didion as a child. This
					might seem like a strange concept, since many people find comfort
					in exactly the opposite notion: that there is, in fact, a higher
					consciousness that cares about our personal welfare and benevolently
					controls our individual lives. However, Didion’s childhood worldview
					still has religious overtones, as she takes comfort in the idea
					that the world exists on such a huge scale that she, as a single
					human being, could never fully comprehend it entirely. For someone
					who always needs to be right and who fervently believes that research
					can answer all questions, acknowledging that there are things in
					the world that cannot be fathomed or understood, even through the
					most diligent inquisition, is a profound shift in thinking and an
					important step toward ending the process of magical thinking.

