Clarissa hears from Anna that the Harlowes will not send
					her any clothes or money. They intend for her to suffer. Troubled
					by the circumstances of her escape, Clarissa confronts Lovelace
					and asks him how much of the event was premeditated. Lovelace boldly
					tells a story very close to the truth: he admits that he had employed
					Leman as a spy and told him to cry out if he saw anyone coming.
					Clarissa asks how, if someone was approaching the house, she had
					not seen them; Lovelace produces a letter from Leman explaining
					that a dog had startled him into yelling, and he had tried to follow
					them and let them know of the mistake. Lovelace also confesses that
					he had seen Clarissa’s letter and assumed it was a revocation, so
					he did not open it. Clarissa is shocked at the complexity of Lovelace’s
					contrivances, but Lovelace’s free confession of them, and his explanation
					that it was concern and love for her that prompted his actions,
					comfort her somewhat. Lovelace’s version of the story demonstrates
					his quick cunning: he reveals much of the wicked truth while appearing
					much less wicked than he really is.

Lovelace is now very agreeable to Clarissa. He seems impartial about
					her choice of where to go, makes generous offers, and promises to
					reform. Although much encouraged by Lovelace’s new attitude, Clarissa
					still doubts that she should marry him; however, she also wonders
					why Lovelace has not yet pursued the idea of marriage at all. Clarissa
					blames herself for her bad situation, saying she was too vain in
					hoping to remain an example of virtue.

Lovelace angers Clarissa by speaking disparagingly of
					her family, then he wins back her regard by showing her letters
					from his aunt and cousin. These women have very good reputations
					and high social standing, so Clarissa is concerned about their view
					of her. The letters express kindness toward Clarissa and admonish
					Lovelace to treat her well. Lovelace tricks her into deciding to
					go to London and agrees to write to a friend, Mr. Doleman, to ask
					about lodgings there. Doleman’s letter lists several available lodgings,
					and Clarissa picks what seem to be the best—the house of the widow
					Sinclair on Dover Street. Lovelace pretends indifference but exults
					to Belford that she has fallen into his trap again, implying that
					the house (which is not on Dover Street, and not owned by Mrs. Sinclair)
					is not as respectable as Doleman’s letter makes it seem.

Lovelace discovers that James Harlowe and his friend Captain Singleton
					are plotting to kidnap Clarissa. He makes light of it, but Clarissa
					is frightened. While she is in a state of confusion Lovelace suddenly
					proposes, knowing that she will not be able to accept in those circumstances.
					Leman writes to inform Lovelace that he may be prosecuted for the
					rape and abandonment of a woman named Miss Betterton, who had died
					in childbirth several years before. Lovelace tells Leman that this
					was a youthful folly and gives him instructions for turning the
					Singleton plot to his own ends. A letter from Belford disapproves
					of Lovelace’s actions and tells him to do justice to Clarissa.

Clarissa writes to her Aunt Hervey and receives a harsh
					reply, which indicates that the Harlowes had intended to stop their
					persecutions after the Wednesday trial meeting with Solmes. Clarissa
					is despondent, but things are about to get worse. She receives a
					letter from Arabella telling her that Mr. Harlowe has laid a curse
					on her, “that you may meet your punishment, both here and hereafter, by means
					of the very wretch in whom you have chosen to place your confidence.”
					Clarissa is most terrified at the extension of the curse into the
					afterlife. Anna tries to comfort her and sends money, which Clarissa
					returns. She writes that Lovelace has been very tender toward her
					in her distress and has finally made an earnest offer of marriage,
					although Clarissa could not accept it because of her agitation.
					Anna tells her to stop being ceremonious and get married at all costs.

Lovelace writes that he is about to be caught in his own
					web. Clarissa’s illness at the news of her father’s curse had frightened
					him into a genuine proposal, and he intends to marry Clarissa after
					all. But he continues to discuss his plots. He knows that James
					has abandoned the Singleton project but will continue to pretend
					it’s a threat in order to increase Clarissa’s dependence on him.
					He has enough doubts about marriage to leave himself loopholes.
					As he prepares to set out for London, Lovelace describes a battle
					with his roguish heart, which turns him away from his honest purposes.
					He reflects that it will probably be better for both him and Clarissa
					if they do not marry, since he will make a bad husband.

Lovelace and Clarissa arrive at Mrs. Sinclair’s whorehouse
					and, now that he is there, Lovelace admits to wavering in his honest
					purpose. The women of the whorehouse—Polly Horton, Sally Martin, and
					Dorcas Wykes—welcome Clarissa warmly, although she’s distrustful
					of them. Lovelace has gone so far as to buy second-hand books so
					that they will appear to be readers of moral literature. Clarissa
					finds that she cannot hold Lovelace to his promise of separate lodgings
					and that she must uncomfortably acquiesce to his story that they
					are already married.

It is revealed that Polly and Sally had been respectable
					women before they knew Lovelace, well educated and raised as if
					for a higher class. They had indulged in “public diversions” and
					became easy targets for seduction. The two are jealous of Clarissa
					and discourage Lovelace from behaving honorably. Lovelace tells
					Clarissa he has found a house for her and is in negotiations to
					buy it from a widow named Fretchville, which provides an excuse
					to put off marriage. Lovelace throws a party and invites his crew
					of rakes—Belford, Mowbray, Belton, and Tourville, as well as a woman
					named Miss Partington. Lovelace gives them all instructions to act
					respectably, but Clarissa finds them vulgar and offensive nonetheless.

Mrs. Howe writes to Clarissa to forbid her correspondence
					with Anna. Clarissa agrees, but Anna insists that they carry on
					in secret with the help of Hickman. Lovelace exults that it is his
					machinations, through Leman and Uncle Antony, that have turned Mrs. Howe
					against Clarissa and removed that means of escape.

Lovelace’s friends send him a letter condemning his plan
					to ruin Clarissa, whom even they can see is a superior being. Lovelace agrees
					with their praise of Clarissa but mocks their sermonizing: he has
					resolved to resume his scheming.

Lovelace is at a crossroads in this section, as he wavers
					between his affections for Clarissa and his inherent libertine ways.
					Clarissa’s consistent virtue seems about to win him over, and when
					her father’s curse sends Clarissa into grief and illness, Lovelace
					is worried and compassionate. He characterizes his proposal as a
					way of keeping her on earth, which indicates that this despair might
					have killed her without it. However, it also suggests that Lovelace’s
					promises (and, essentially, his wicked schemes) are keeping Clarissa
					away from heaven. After this incident Lovelace resolves to be honest,
					but he is never fully committed to it, as he continues to build
					on his contrivances, just in case he changes his mind. Although
					he believes that marriage is the right thing to do, Lovelace acknowledges
					that his inability to desist from his libertine intrigues will most
					likely lead to grief for both him and Clarissa.

Lovelace’s resolution to be an honest man is quickly tested
					upon arrival at Mrs. Sinclair’s house. The women there goad him
					away from his albeit shaky resolution and their teasing has a strong
					effect on him. The women cannot bear all of the blame, however:
					as soon as he steps into Mrs. Sinclair’s house, the battle seems
					to have been almost won by wickedness. The house brings out the
					worst in Lovelace and reinforces his already evil nature: he describes
					a battle with his heart, which is unusual in that the heart does
					not represent Lovelace’s better or more caring self, but instead
					embodies his villainous habits and responds to wicked temptations.
					Indeed, if it is the women who tempt Lovelace to evil, he has himself
					to blame for it, since he ruined them in the first place. In a sense,
					then, Lovelace has brought himself and Clarissa to a place where
					his own wickedness is concentrated and will entrap them both.

It seems that Lovelace enjoys testing the limits of his
					power by putting Clarissa into more and more intolerable situations.
					The party demonstrates that his wickedness knows no bounds, even among
					other depraved characters like his rakish comrades. Although very
					bad men themselves, Belford, Belton, Tourville, and Mowbray know
					that Lovelace’s treatment of Clarissa exceeds their limits of bad
					behavior and Clarissa’s grace, sense, and beauty shine through even
					in the middle of a whorehouse, and are perceptible even to hardened
					rakes. Their response is indicative of both her exemplarity and
					his inhumanity. Lovelace’s motivation for exposing Clarissa to his
					libertine friends is not quite clear, but it could be another of
					his tests: he says that he wants to show her off to them, but their
					vulgarity would threaten any hope that she’d be won over. This might
					also explain his choice of the whorehouse for lodgings, as the whores
					are jealous and resentful of Clarissa. Women’s cruelty, Lovelace
					remarks, has no boundaries, while men’s stops somewhere. Where Lovelace’s
					boundary lies remains to be seen, but it is well beyond even the
					rake’s pale.

Although Clarissa’s innocence and virtue continue to hurt
					her, she does have some kind of instinct for evil. She cannot content
					herself with the idea of marrying Lovelace, and she intuitively
					dislikes the whores even though they appear to be genteel ladies,
					due to Lovelace’s arrangements of books and instructions for proper behavior.
					But, naturally, Clarissa feels bad about her dislike and attempts
					to quell her suspicions. Because Clarissa refuses to be obligated,
					she also rejects Anna’s money, which might have made escape possible.
					Her unshakeable codes of behavior once again help to place her in
					great danger.

The actions of the Harlowes also align with Lovelace’s
					plots. Their remarkable implacability keeps Clarissa from returning
					home and their refusal to send money gives her no way to go anywhere else.
					Mr. Harlowe’s curse throws Clarissa into despair and into deeper
					dependence on Lovelace. James’s scheme to have Captain Singleton
					carry Clarissa off is quickly dropped, but it gives Lovelace endless
					excuses to stay near her and to forbid her from going out.

Sally and Polly act as examples of what could happen to
					Clarissa and also represent Richardson’s overarching theme of the
					innocent woman’s subjection to the mischievous rake. Although some
					of the books Clarissa finds in her room are put there to deceive
					her, Sally and Polly are characterized by Lovelace as great readers.
					They give evidence of their cultural literacy by occasionally bursting
					out into poetic quotation. Gentility, in the case of Sally and Polly,
					is only a screen over wantonness and cruelty. The fault for their
					fall is placed in their upbringing, rather than their characters,
					reminding the reader of Richardson’s characterization of the book
					as a warning to parents as well as daughters. The mention of Lovelace’s
					victim Miss Betterton, while her whole story is not yet known, provides
					another example of the dangers posed by rakes to young women, and
					Lovelace’s careless treatment of the threat of prosecution shows
					that little recrimination is likely to come to offenders of the
					law.

