Aza is tired the next day from sleepless nights and drinking too much hand sanitizer, but she had already made plans to take Daisy to Applebee’s. In the car, Aza confronts Daisy about writing about her in her fanfiction stories. Daisy apologizes for writing something negative but explains that it is her way of coping since Aza is a lot to deal with. She tells Aza that she is too selfish to get out of her own head, read Daisy’s stories, or know anything about Daisy’s life. Aza yells back at Daisy and accidentally hits the car in front of her. Aza, injured, gets out of the car and tries to pull her dad’s phone out of the trunk but falls over in pain. People around her try to calm her down thinking that she is upset because she believes her parents will be mad at her. She eventually collapses in pain. Aza wakes up in the hospital with her mom there and thinks her ribs are broken. She asks if she will be put on antibiotics.

A doctor tells Aza that she has a mild liver laceration and will need to stay in the hospital for a couple days. She will not need antibiotics because the laceration is mild. Aza is concerned about the increased risk of C. diff from staying in the hospital. Her mom stays there with her. Aza wakes up in the night consumed with thoughts of bacteria, in her finger, in her body, or in the air of the hospital. Aza texts Daisy to apologize again. Daisy responds back with an apology and concern for her friend. Still consumed with thoughts about C. diff, Aza gets out of bed and begins drinking the hand sanitizer from the dispenser on the wall. Aza’s mom wakes up and sees Aza drinking the hand sanitizer and then vomit. Her mom calls in a nurse.

After drinking the hand sanitizer from the dispenser in the hospital, Aza wakes up in a fog. She reflects on the pain she feels and notices the things around her like the bowl of Cheerios her mom made her and the flowers Davis sent. She still has nagging thoughts about bacteria that scare her, so she tells her mom she is in trouble.

