As they continue heading west, Humbert becomes increasingly paranoid.
					One day, Humbert catches Lolita talking to a strange man, who resembles
					Humbert’s relative Gustave Trapp. Lolita says she was simply giving
					him directions and shrugs off Humbert’s suspicions. On the road
					the next day, Humbert suspects they’re being followed by a red car
					but manages to evade it. Lolita says she has misread the tour book,
					and by mistake they find themselves at a theater, watching a play
					written by Clare Quilty and Vivian Darkbloom. Humbert is suspicious
					about the play’s authors but cannot see them well in the shadows.
					When questioned, Lolita states that Vivian is actually a man and
					Clare is the female author of The Enchanted Hunters.
					Humbert recalls that Lolita used to have a crush on the celebrity
					Clare Quilty, but Lolita laughs off the idea. 

At the post office, Humbert reads a letter to Lolita from
					Mona, who describes the school production of The Enchanted
						Hunters. When he finishes the letter, he realizes that
					Lolita has disappeared. Humbert chases after her, and when he finds
					her, Lolita says she had seen one of her friends from Beardsley.
					Humbert interrogates her vigorously, but she does not budge in her
					story. Humbert tells Lolita that he has written down the license
					plate number of the car following them, but he discovers that Lolita
					has erased the number and smacks her for it. Later, Humbert realizes
					that the man following him—whom he has taken to calling Trapp, after
					Humbert’s Swiss relative, whom the man resembles—has been switching
					cars. When Humbert’s car gets a flat tire, Trapp stops not far behind
					them. Humbert gets out of the car to confront him, but Trapp turns
					and speeds away while Humbert’s car, with Lolita at the wheel, starts moving.
					Lolita claims that she was trying to stop the car from rolling away.
					Humbert begins to keep the gun in his pocket. 

Despite believing that Lolita’s acting experience has
					taught her to be deceitful, Humbert fondly remembers watching her
					go through her drama exercises. However, that thrill doesn’t compare
					to the joy he feels while watching Lolita play tennis. Humbert goes
					on at length, describing how maddeningly attractive Lolita is on
					the tennis courts. He admits that he finds all kinds of games romantic
					and magical, including his chess games with Gaston. In the middle
					of one tennis game, at a hotel in Colorado, Humbert receives an
					urgent note that the Beardsley School has called. However, Humbert
					realizes that the school would have no way of getting in touch with
					him there. From a window in the hotel, Humbert looks back to the
					tennis court and sees a strange man playing doubles with Lolita.
					By the time Humbert returns, the man has left and neither Lolita
					nor the other doubles pair will tell him about the mysterious stranger.
					Lolita tells him she wants to go swimming.

Later, at the pool, Humbert sees a dark-haired man watching
					Lolita lasciviously. He sees that Lolita can tell the man is watching
					her, and he watches as Lolita flirts with the man from afar. Humbert
					recognizes him as Trapp, the man who has been following them, but Trapp
					disappears before Humbert can confront him. Humbert drinks heavily
					and starts to wonder if he’s imagining Trapp. 

Later that night, Lolita claims to be ill. Seeing that
					she has a high fever, Humbert takes her to the hospital. He stays
					in a nearby motel, separated from Lolita for the first time in two
					years. Lolita recovers quickly, and Humbert visits her in the hospital,
					bringing presents. He sees a letter on Lolita’s bed tray, but the
					nurse insists that it belongs to her, not Lolita. Later, Humbert
					himself becomes feverish, but he tells the hospital he’ll pick up
					Lolita the following day. However, when he arrives at the hospital,
					the doctors inform him that Lolita has already left with her uncle.
					Humbert goes into a violent rage but manages to get himself out
					of the hospital. He vows to kill Lolita’s abductor.

In this section, the novel begins to resemble a traditional
					crime novel and detective story. As in the gangster movies Lolita
					adores, Humbert and Lolita find themselves pursued by mysterious
					cars and strange, shadowy men. Humbert begins to fall into the role
					of a film noir protagonist, adopting the appropriate language and
					habits, drinking heavily and calling his gun his “chum.” Both the
					reader and Humbert find themselves awash in clues, but many of those clues
					will end up as nothing more than red herrings, or dead ends. The
					combination of Humbert’s paranoia, the mysterious cars, and Lolita’s
					inexplicable absences make Humbert’s situation seem dire indeed.
					The more Humbert tries to prevent the inevitable, the less control
					he has over Lolita—or even himself. Despairing, he turns to violence,
					hoping to eliminate his mounting sense of dread by eliminating his
					shadowy pursuer, whom he refers to as “Trapp,” with a pun on “trap”
					that is all too appropriate to Humbert’s situation. Humbert’s paranoia
					can be attributed, in part, to this shift in the narrative’s genre.
					Humbert considers himself an aesthete, an intellectual, and a romantic.
					He enjoys styling himself the hero in a love story, but he’s profoundly
					unsuited to the role of gumshoe in a hard-boiled thriller.

The butterfly motif continues in these chapters, as Lolita
					transforms from girl to woman, from hapless innocent to seemingly
					ruthless manipulator. If the novel undergoes a shift in genre, from romance
					to crime thriller, Lolita’s role in the narrative shifts as well. Whereas
					before, Lolita represented the idealized loved one, she now represents
					the femme fatale, a crucial character type in the film noir genre.
					Femme fatales are cruel yet irresistible, and, like that category of
					character, Lolita grows increasingly indifferent to Humbert’s disintegration,
					seducing him into trusting her only to betray him, leading him to
					his destruction. Lolita lures Humbert to the summer production of
					Quilty’s play but then hides what she knows about Quilty, convincing
					Humbert that Quilty is actually a woman. She then defies Humbert
					by secretly erasing Quilty’s license plate number. Humbert’s threats
					and bribes are having less and less of an effect on Lolita, as she
					slips out of Humbert’s control. Like a classic film noir protagonist,
					Humbert begins to drink too much and rely too heavily on his gun. 

We should note, however, that although Humbert seems to
					have fallen into this crime thriller unwittingly, he remains the
					narrator of this tale. This means that Humbert controls the shift
					in genre, and that the decision to cast himself as the beleaguered,
					hapless detective is, ultimately, his. Lolita may come across as
					a femme fatale in these chapters, but her inner psyche and secret
					intentions remain just as opaque as before: it’s never made clear
					whether Lolita is masterminding the whole scheme or whether she’s
					simply acting on Quilty’s instructions. Similarly, what Humbert
					interprets as a cruel plot to destroy him may, in fact, be the desperate
					actions of a girl trying to escape an oppressive, unhealthy situation.
					After all, if Humbert can convince us, his jury, that the object
					of his sincere devotion cruelly duped him, then he manages to cast
					himself as the true victim in this situation, perhaps earning our
					sympathy.

