Rayona, Sky, and Evelyn arrive at Sky and Evelyn’s trailer
					at the end of the day. Evelyn puts on a housecoat and slippers that
					remind Rayona of her mother. Evelyn has bought two packs of macaroni
					and cheese for each of them, but Rayona falls asleep on the couch instead
					of having dinner. Sky and Evelyn go through Rayona’s pockets while
					she sleeps in an attempt to find out more about her. They suspect
					Rayona is a runaway, but when they find the letter she picked up
					during her rounds, they decide she must be telling the truth. The
					next morning, Sky and Evelyn are groggy but Rayona is fresh and
					ready to start work. The three drive to work, where Evelyn makes
					Rayona breakfast again. Rayona can tell that Evelyn likes her, and
					she likes Evelyn in return.

	Rayona starts her rounds. She reaches the lake where
					she and Father Tom went swimming and considers taking a dip, but
					someone is already there. Looking from behind a tree by the side
					of the lake, Rayona sees an attractive girl on the yellow raft.
					Rayona sees the girl as everything she herself is not “but ought
					to be.” The girl is talking to someone on the shore, and Rayona
					overhears that her name is Ellen. Soon, Ellen dives into the water
					and swims away.

	Rayona starts to become accustomed to her rounds. In
					addition to trash, she sometimes finds lost articles of clothing.
					Once something has been in the lost and found box for three weeks,
					anyone can claim it, so Rayona slowly gathers a new wardrobe for
					herself. Rayona sometimes also finds things for Sky and Evelyn.
					One day she finds a blanket that Dave, one of the college students,
					wants, but Rayona keeps it for Evelyn.

	Rayona cannot seem to get Ellen out of her mind, so she
					asks around to find out what she can about the girl. Evelyn does
					not particularly like Ellen because “she’s some kind of vegetarian,”
					and Sky knows only that Ellen drives a red Toyota Celica and buys
					premium gasoline with her father’s credit card. Andy’s opinion of
					Ellen is focused mainly on her “[b]azzooms,” and Dave thinks that
					Ellen is a “bubblehead,” so Rayona gathers most of her intelligence
					from Ellen herself. On the morning of the Fourth of July, Ellen
					enters the lodge kitchen with her parents and politely asks Evelyn
					to make them breakfast. Ellen starts talking to Rayona, who is surprised
					by how much Ellen knows about her. Ellen’s father shows Rayona a picture
					of Ellen’s foster brother, a Native American child whom Ellen’s
					parents sponsor through the Save the Children charity. The boy is
					named Rocky and reminds Rayona of Foxy. Ellen’s father proudly explains
					that Rocky has begun to call him and his wife “Mother and Pops.”
					The conversation turns to Ellen’s skills with children and animals,
					and Ellen’s mother mentions how lonely “Rascal” is now that Ellen
					is gone. Rayona catches Evelyn looking at her and realizes that
					Evelyn recognizes “Mother and Pops” and “Rascal” from the letter
					Rayona picked off the ground. Rayona runs from the diner and throws
					the letter onto the ground, but soon picks it up again, reading
					it and seeing her own family in her mind.

Sky and Evelyn’s house seems strangely familiar to Rayona
					because a number of the objects and decorations in their trailer
					fulfill a role similar to that of the physical details of Rayona’s
					past. Even though Rayona never acknowledges it, the trailer is similar
					to Aunt Ida’s house in many respects. Sky and Evelyn’s trailer is
					full of tabloid newspapers such as the National Enquirer and the
					Star, the literary equivalent of the soap operas Ida watches. Evelyn’s
					typical outfit of a sleeveless housecoat and fuzzy slippers also
					reminds Rayona of her past, particularly her mother. However, Rayona
					resists the memories and feelings that Sky and Evelyn’s trailer
					evoke because they interfere with her attempts to make her new life
					as separate as possible from the one she has lived for the past
					fifteen years.

	In Ellen, Rayona encounters the idealized embodiment
					of her own fabricated life. Seeing Ellen on the yellow raft, Rayona
					considers the girl to be everything she herself should be but is
					not. Rayona’s quest to find out everything there is to know about
					Ellen is partly an attempt to become more like Ellen, at least in
					her fantasies. Indeed, when Rayona sees Ellen at the lake, she avoids
					looking for too long for fear of seeing something imperfect. Rayona
					maintains only limited contact with Ellen, probably out of fear
					of ruining her fantasy, but is able to idealize the little contact
					she does have.

	In her interactions with Sky and Evelyn, Rayona is able
					to live her fantasy life to some extent, but her romanticizing is
					jeopardized by her encounters with Ellen. Having read the letter
					in Rayona’s wallet, Sky and Evelyn see Rayona only in the context
					of the life she has made up. Because they treat Rayona like she
					actually lives the life described in the letter, she can imagine
					that she really does have two loving parents, a big house with a
					yard, and a dog. Rayona is free to imagine that her time at Bearpaw
					Lake is just a small break from her idealized real life. Rayona’s
					fantasy breaks down, however, when she finally comes into contact
					with the true owner of the life she has borrowed. When Ellen and
					her parents come to the diner for breakfast, Evelyn recognizes in
					their conversation facts that she had previously attributed to Rayona.
					The whole purpose of Rayona’s fantasy life is to make other people
					believe it is her reality, and when that belief evaporates, her
					dream world comes crashing down around her. Nonetheless, even though
					she is aware that her constructed life is a lie, she cannot let
					go of the fantasy. Rayona keeps Ellen’s letter, reading it again
					and putting herself back into the world it creates for her.

