The bomb had not only left the underground
					organs of the plants intact; it had stimulated them.	

Some weeks after the explosion, three of the main characters
					fall victim to radiation sickness. Father Kleinsorge is walking
					through the city to deposit money in Hiroshima when he suddenly
					becomes weak and barely makes it back to the mission. Mrs. Nakamura’s hair
					begins to fall out, and she and her daughter become ill. At the same
					time, Mr. Tanimoto, weak and feverish, becomes bedridden.

	Miss Sasaki is transferred to the Red Cross Hospital
					in Hiroshima and placed under the care of Dr. Sasaki. Dr. Sasaki notices
					small hemorrhages all over her bare skin, a mysterious symptom many
					of his patients are beginning to show. He later discovers that this
					is the result of her low white-blood cell count, another symptom
					of radiation sickness. Dr. Fujii is living at a friend’s house in
					nearby Fukawa and is beginning to treat patients again.

	In early September, nature itself seems bent on destroying
					what remains of Hiroshima when heavy rains result in floods. Dr.
					Fujii must evacuate his friend’s house when the river floods and
					washes the house away—water claims Fujii’s residence just a month
					after his clinic fell into the river.

	Radiation sickness baffles everyone well into September
					and afterward. In the next few months Mrs. Nakamura and Mr. Tanimoto
					gradually get better, but Father Kleinsorge continues to have a high
					fever and low blood cell count, and he is sent to a hospital in Tokyo.
					The doctor there predicts he will die in two weeks, but Kleinsorge
					lives, his blood count swinging wildly up and down and his cuts
					constantly reopening. He becomes a curiosity in Tokyo, and once
					his fever is gone and his health relatively stable, he is interviewed
					by curious doctors, experts, and newspaper reporters.

	In Hiroshima, as Japanese physicists make observations
					about the blast area, Dr. Sasaki and his colleagues develop new
					theories about radiation sickness by observing their patients. Miss
					Sasaki’s infection lingers on eleven weeks after the bomb, and she
					remains in the hospital through November. She becomes extremely
					depressed, especially since her fiancé will not visit her. Father
					Kleinsorge, who has since returned to the city, comes to visit her
					in the hospital. For the next several months, Miss Sasaki seems
					to draw strength from the priest. By the end of April her infection
					is gone and she is able to walk on crutches.

	One by one each of the characters, like Miss Sasaki,
					begins to resume some sort of a normal life. Dr. Fujii opens a new
					clinic and capitalizes on Japan’s new visitors by treating American
					patients. Father Kleinsorge and another priest commission a three-story
					mission house exactly like the one they had lost; Father Kleinsorge eventually
					becomes so busy that he falls ill again and must return to the Tokyo
					hospital to rest. Mr. Tanimoto attempts to restore his own church
					in the city, but he does not have as much money as the Jesuits.
					Mrs. Nakamura, when her hair has grown back, scrapes together her
					money and rents a small shack near the site of her old house, while
					putting her children back into school in Hiroshima. Dr. Sasaki,
					after almost never leaving the hospital building in the four months
					after the blast, begins to focus on his own life and marries in March.

In thinking of their experience of that
						time Dr. Hiraiwa repeated, ‘What a fortunate that we are Japanese!
						It was my first time I ever tasted such a beautiful spirit when
						I decided to die for our Emperor.’	

Hersey’s narrative is compelling because he shows the
					events following the bomb through the personal experiences of witnesses. Through
					the eyes of Miss Sasaki, for instance, we learn that the bomb has
					somehow greatly increased the growth of vegetation throughout Hiroshima,
					and that wildflowers and weeds—the panic grass and feverfew that
					give the chapter its title—have burst through the ruins to give
					the city a “vivid, lush, optimistic green.” Miss Sasaki describes
					a powerful image—nature takes over where civilization has been destroyed—but
					Hersey does not delve into the image deeply in his own voice.

	As Hersey’s characters slowly rebuild their lives in
					Hiroshima, we also learn about the extent of the damage and the
					blast, based on reports of Japanese physicists in the weeks and
					months that follow. As in other chapters, Hersey mentions these
					facts only in passing, so he does not distract attention from his
					human stories, but these reports are noteworthy for the kinds of
					information they contain. Most of his American readers in 1946 knew
					little about the bomb. The accounts of the Japanese physicists,
					which were heavily censored at the time, suggest the bomb’s absolutely
					awesome power—the enormous heat generated at its center, and its
					ability to melt the surface of granite thousands of yards away.
					The flash generated by the bomb was so bright, notes Hersey, that
					it left shadows of buildings and even human silhouettes imprinted
					on walls. Moreover, the Japanese scientists discover that the bomb
					dropped on Nagasaki, a plutonium bomb as opposed to a uranium one,
					was even more powerful, and that the Americans are capable of developing
					one that is ten or even twenty times as powerful. In short, Hersey
					makes it clear to his readers that this is not like any other air
					raid or attack; the atomic bomb should give everyone in the world
					something to worry about.

	Hersey’s own political agenda still remains unclear in
					Chapter Four. While Hersey includes a number of vivid details and
					accounts, we should also note a phenomenon that is absent from his
					story: any kind of serious anti-American feeling in the wake of
					Hiroshima’s destruction. Mrs. Nakamura develops a bitter hatred
					of Americans when she believes that they have dropped a poison on
					the city; but when this rumor turns out to be unfounded, her hatred
					quickly fades away. Later she tells Hersey that the general attitude
					of the Japanese is a kind of grim acceptance: “It was war and we
					had to expect it.” Mr. Tanimoto writes a letter to an American friend
					with a kind of pride in the way the Japanese reacted. He describes
					a father and son consecrating their lives to their Emperor, or two
					girls who sing the national anthem as they are crushed under a fallen
					fence. Hersey notes that there is a “curious kind of elated community spirit”
					among most of the survivors of the blast. Out of all the voices in
					Hersey’s account, only Dr. Sasaki seems to maintain any sort of bitterness
					toward those who dropped the bomb.

	The end of this chapter, which was the end of the original
					edition of Hersey’s book, includes somewhat ambivalent and ambiguous accounts.
					Father Siemes, in his letter to Rome, offers a detached view of
					the tragedy, proposing that total war—a concept promoted by the
					Japanese in World War II—will necessarily include war against civilians.
					Such a view would no doubt be amenable to Americans who support
					the decision to drop the bomb. Toshio Nakamura’s account of the
					day of the explosion is also short of moral judgments and instead
					offers an impressionistic view of the day. Just as he has done throughout
					the book, Hersey lets the image speak for itself: a ten-year-old
					boy who progresses from eating peanuts in the morning, to seeing
					“burned and bleeding” people walking around, to meeting a child
					his own age whose mother is dead.

