Heartened by a good night’s sleep, Alex walks around the
					top floor of the house, trying to figure out the name of his caring
					host. In the man’s room he finds a copy of “A Clockwork Orange,”
					by F. Alexander. He begins to leaf through F. Alexander’s book,
					though he understands little of what he reads. As far as he can
					glean from the somewhat overwrought prose, F. Alexander thinks of
					people as fruit that grow on a great tree planted by God, and that
					God needs those people to slake his thirsty love. These same people,
					however, are in danger of being turned into machines by the modern
					world. Reading these words, Alex doubts F. Alexander’s sanity.

F. Alexander eliminates Alex’s doubts, however, when he
					greets Alex heartily and cheerfully. F. Alexander has been hard
					at work this morning, having already written an article about Alex’s
					victimization at the hands of the totalitarian-leaning State, and
					waiting for Alex to sign it before it goes to publication. He also
					mentions that he’s spoken about Alex over the phone to his associates,
					to which Alex unthinkingly responds that he thought F. Alexander
					didn’t have a phone. At this, F. Alexander tenses up, and Alex wonders
					if F. Alexander remembers that the thugs who raped his wife tried
					to trick her into letting them in by asking to use the phone. F.
					Alexander’s moment of suspicion passes quickly, but Alex resolves
					to stay on his guard nevertheless. 

Over breakfast, Alex asks F. Alexander what they’ll get
					out of this spate of activism. For F. Alexander, the answer is clear.
					F. Alexander sees himself as a defender of liberty, and a triumphant
					defense of that liberty would be its own reward. He doesn’t seem
					to have given much thought to what Alex stands to gain, however,
					and simply urges Alex to finish his breakfast so that they may look
					over the article. Commenting on the article, Alex momentarily slips
					into nadsat, which seems to trigger another bout
					of suspicion in F. Alexander, who remembers the slang from two years
					ago.

Soon, F. Alexander’s associates arrive—Z. Dolin, Rubinstein, and
					D.B. da Silva. They delight in gawking at Alex, their “poor victim”
					and weapon against the government. Dolin only wishes Alex could
					look “more zombyish,” a sentiment that Alex doesn’t appreciate.
					Offended and annoyed, Alex carelessly addresses them in nadsat when
					he asks what their plans are for him. F. Alexander notes this strange
					language again, growing more suspicious, but only frowning for now.
					Meanwhile, Alex becomes upset in his own turn because the men offer
					him no tangible solution for returning to the way he was, and further,
					treat him as “a thing that’s like got to be just used” in their
					political struggle. During this rant, Alex lapses into nadsat almost
					entirely, even using the word “dim.” This elicits a crazed gleam
					in F. Alexander’s eyes, making Alex nervous. Alex tries to leave,
					but realizes the futility of resisting their plans when Dolin approaches
					him to grab his arm.

Alex goes with F. Alexander’s associates back into town,
					to an apartment not far from Alex’s former home. There, the men
					plan to leave him for a while, but before they go, they ask Alex
					if he is responsible for F. Alexander’s wife’s death. Though they
					promise to be discreet, Alex says only that he has paid for his
					sins and the sins of others. This thought causes him to feel a bit
					sick, so he lies down to get some sleep.

When Alex wakes, he hears music coming through the wall;
					a symphony by a Danish composer named Otto Skadelig. He listens in
					joy for the better part of two seconds before the sickness wells
					up in him. Distressed, he tries to bang on the wall, but the music
					only grows louder. Alex then tries the door, but it has been locked
					from the outside. Driven mad by his sickness, he cries out to God
					and stumbles around the room until he sees two pamphlets, one that reads,
					“DEATH TO THE GOVERNMENT,” and another that reads, “Open the window
					to fresh air, fresh ideas, a new way of living.” He takes these
					as a sign to jump from the window, several stories above ground.
					Alex screams out that he hopes God forgives the world for ruining
					his life, and then jumps.

In the previous chapters, Burgess emphasizes the growing
					filial relationship between Alex and F. Alexander, who recruits
					Alex in his efforts to discredit the government. But as the novel
					progresses, the father-son relationship becomes strained, as the
					truth about F. Alexander’s wife starts to emerge. In this way, the
					relationship between the two men starts to resemble the Oedipal
					struggle described by psychologist Sigmund Freud, in which a rivalry
					develops between father and son for possession of the mother. F.
					Alexander finds himself both solicitous toward Alex as a “poor victim”
					and furious at him as the scoundrel who raped and murdered his wife.
					In this way, Alex represents the Freudian son who, having wrested
					the mother from his father (by raping her, in this case), elicits
					feelings of bitterness and vengeance from the scorned father. Thus
					defeated, F. Alexander vows revenge, which he nearly succeeds in
					exacting by driving Alex to suicide. 

In light of this Freudian element, Alex’s mistaken characterization
					of F. Alexander as a “kind protecting and like motherly veck [man]”
					reveals Alex’s innocence. Throughout A Clockwork Orange we
					see numerous references to the government as a paternalistic institution.
					Tensions between father figures and young men emerge at several
					points in the novel—for example, in Billyboy and Dim’s condescension
					toward the old men in the library, and in the abundance of male
					officials who patronize Alex. Given these instances, it comes as
					no surprise that Alex would associate fatherhood with the forces
					that seek to manipulate his will for their own devices. By initially
					showing humanitarian concern for Alex, F. Alexander seems to act
					in contrast to the other male figures in Alex’s life, causing Alex to
					refer to him as “motherly.” But as we see later in this chapter,
					F. Alexander makes his fatherly presence felt when he uses Alex
					as a tool against the government. 

Despite their opposition to the State in the worthy cause
					of “Liberty,” F. Alexander and his associates are not heroes. Their
					conduct in this chapter satirizes the liberal tendency to forsake
					concrete human realities for political and philosophical ideals.
					To these men, Alex is not a pitiable human being, but rather, a
					“superb device” to be “installed” in their activist plans. This
					language better describes a machine than a human, and Alex’s anger
					at being treated as a “thing that’s like got to be just used” is
					well warranted. Alex’s subsequent lapse into nadsat functions
					as an assertion of his individual will, though it also causes F.
					Alexander’s men to change their mind about how they will use him
					politically. Having found that individuals are inconvenient to the
					cause of individualism, they decide that Alex is worth less to them
					as a living witness to the State’s injustices and will have a stronger
					impact as an abstract “martyr to the cause of Liberty.”

