During the family's first year in New York, they rented
					a small apartment near a Catholic school. Yolanda liked the teachers
					there, especially her grandmotherly fourth grade teacher, Sister
					Zoe. This teacher told Yolanda that she had a beautiful name and
					insisted that the class be taught how to pronounce it correctly.
					Yolanda was the only immigrant in the class and got special tutoring
					from Sister Zoe to help her learn English. She was seated apart
					from the other students to practice pronouncing words like "laundromat,"
					"subway," and "snow."

Yolanda soon had learned enough English to understand
					that the Cuban missile crisis was making everyone very nervous.
					Yolanda's school had air-raid drills and she imagined what would
					happen to their bodies if a nuclear missile hit New York. She learned
					new words to describe the situation like "radioactive fallout" and "bomb
					shelter." Sister Zoe explained how a bomb would explode, and drew
					pictures on the chalkboard of mushroom clouds and fallout. Yolanda
					and her family prayed for world peace.

When winter came, the days grew shorter and the weather
					colder. One day as Yolanda sat at her desk by the window, she saw
					spots in the air like the ones on the chalkboard. She screamed "Bomb!"
					and some girls began to cry. Sister Zoe just laughed and explained
					that it was only snow. Yolanda watched the snow that she had heard
					so much about, but had never seen before, as Sister Zoe explained
					that each flake was unique and beautiful, like each person.

Yolanda's growing vocabulary better prepares her to interact
					with American culture and will open up a new world of language and
					literature. In the mean time, it prepares her to describe the unexpected aspects
					of American society that she cannot imagine or relate to as a Dominican
					girl. Her teacher's kindness is a pillar of support in an uncertain
					and terrifying age, when the threat nuclear holocaust seems more
					real. Yolanda's fear leads her to assume the worst when she encounters
					a strange and unknown phenomenon.

This short anecdote becomes a funny story Yolanda can
					tell the reader in the first person. This memory also indicates
					why she grew to use language as a tool to deal with the unusual
					and uncertain traumas she will encounter later in life. If she can
					name a phenomenon in English and thus understand its beauty or danger,
					she feels prepared to find a place for herself in the United States
					and better articulate her own voice.

