Didion cites studies by Sigmund Freud and Melanie Klein
					that refer to grief as a temporary state of manic depression. She
					details how, in the year after John’s death, she stops thinking
					rationally. During that year, she believes that her thoughts or
					wishes can change outcomes. She can’t read his obituary, for example,
					since its publication means that she has allowed other people to
					think of John as dead—and if they believe him to be dead, he might
					never come back. She can’t give away his shoes, since she believes
					that he will need them when he returns. Didion’s magical thinking
					begins with John’s autopsy, when she irrationally believes that,
					if the coroners can diagnose what happened to John, they will then
					be able to fix the problem and bring him back to life.

The day of the autopsy, Didion receives a call from the
					hospital asking if she will donate John’s organs. Shaken by this
					question, she later realizes that they must have wanted his eyes,
					since they’re among the few organs that be harvested from a dead
					body. Thinking about John’s eyes, she recalls a poem by E. E. Cummings
					that she later tries to find in her library. She instead discovers
					a poetry anthology that John owned at boarding school. In the book,
					she finds the young John’s process for analyzing a poem outlined
					on the flyleaf: “1) What is the meaning of
					the poem and what is the experience? 2) What
					thought or reflection does the experience lead us to? 3)
					What mood, feeling, emotion is stirred or created
					by the poem as a whole?” Didion applies these questions to the call
					she has received from the hospital, treating the experience itself
					as if it were a poem.

On the surface, Didion seems to understand that John’s
					death is irreversible. She arranges for the autopsy, cremation,
					and placement of his ashes. After Quintana wakes from her coma,
					they hold a funeral service. Though she has now made a public acknowledgment
					of his death, Didion still believes she has the power to bring John
					back.

Since her childhood, she says, she has dealt with problems
					by conducting research. How-to guides and inspirational books seem useless
					to her, but clinical literature by psychiatrists and psychologists
					prove to be more helpful. As she reads various texts, she also sifts
					through her own memories to make sense of her feelings. She thinks
					about PSA (Pacific Southwest Airlines), which offered cheap flights
					between Los Angeles and San Francisco. PSA planes had smiles painted
					on their noses, and the toddler Quintana used to refer to flying
					on PSA as “going on the smile.” Didion remembers how John had noted
					Quintana’s childhood phrases on scraps of paper and used them as
					dialogue for a character, Cat, in his novel Dutch Shea,
						Jr. Cat, the protagonist’s daughter, is killed by the IRA,
					and her parents struggle to make sense of the immense loss. Thinking
					back to the book now, Didion realizes that John’s novel was always
					about bereavement, though she didn’t realize it at the time. Didion
					cycles between memories of flying PSA and her wedding to John at
					San Juan Bautista. She also recalls the poem “Rose Aylmer,” an elegy
					she had read as an undergraduate. In the poem, the speaker feels
					great sorrow at the death of a young woman but restricts his mourning
					to a single night of “memories and sighs.”

Didion reads a study by Dr. Vamik Volkan, which describes
					a therapy that analysts can use to understand the relationship between
					a survivor and the deceased. Didion becomes incensed while reading
					the study, wondering how a doctor could ever understand her shared
					history with John. Didion later reads a passage about coping with
					grief from Emily Post’s 1922 etiquette guide, which
					offers detailed instructions for the practical steps one must take
					after the death of a loved one. Didion connects Post’s book to the
					writings of Philippe Ariès and Geoffrey Gorer, which track the evolution
					from death as an accepted part of life to a concealed event in which
					mourning is treated as “morbid self-indulgence.” During Didion’s
					own childhood, she says, there were prescribed scripts to follow
					when someone died: bake a ham, drop it by the bereaved’s house,
					and attend the funeral. During Didion’s grieving period, a friend
					brings over quart containers of congee from Chinatown every night,
					as congee is all she can eat at the time.

Magical thinking is a strategy that Didion uses to cope
					with her lack of control over what happened to John and Quintana.
					This mentality allows her to assert some agency in a situation where
					she is powerless to determine outcomes. Didion knows herself as
					a high-functioning person, able to manage situations by conducting
					rigorous research, communicating with the right people, and approaching
					problems with an organized, pragmatic outlook. Her daughter’s illness
					and husband’s death are fundamentally unmanageable and illogical
					events, and though at some level she understands that these situations
					are beyond her control, she clings to the idea that she has the
					power to change them. Didion suddenly develops a child’s mentality,
					believing that she can change her situation through her heartfelt
					wishes. Though this magical thinking is only a coping mechanism,
					she cannot acknowledge it as such, since this realization would
					deprive her of the ability to believe that she has the power to
					bring back her dead husband. For Didion, magical thinking remains
					a temporary outlook rather than a permanent reality, since she ultimately
					realizes that John cannot, in fact, come back.

Didion’s memoir quotes extensively from other books on
					grief and mourning, highlighting the fact that Didion sees herself
					as a student engaging in a process of self-education. The first
					step taken by any reporter working on an in-depth story is to conduct
					research, and Didion approaches John’s death as a puzzle she must
					decipher. Didion believes that, once she is equipped with the proper
					knowledge, she will be able to correct the problem—another manifestation
					of her magical thinking. Though she reads grief literature and psychological
					studies as a student, she has intensely emotional responses to what
					she reads, indicating that her intellectual objectivity is affected
					by her personal feelings. As much as she may want to simply absorb
					the knowledge available to her, she repeatedly responds as if the
					studies were written directly in response to her own experiences.
					In the end, she finds that she really wants affirmation and comfort
					from her readings. She finds support in unexpected sources, most
					notably in Emily Post’s book on etiquette, which outlines the practical
					steps one must take after the death of a loved one, without analysis
					or judgment. Didion finds that she is not ready to fully engage
					with the intellectual and philosophical questions of grief but needs
					assurance and guidance through the first stages of her own emotional
					response to John’s death.

As a result of her reading, Didion comes to understand
					the shifting status of grief in American culture and attempts to
					understand how cultural expectations inform her own behavior. Previously
					a public, ritualized condition, mourning has become a private, guilt-inducing
					phenomenon in today’s culture. Didion focuses on Emily Post’s book
					of etiquette, noting that at the time of publication, death occurred
					in the home and was a much more familiar part of life. Adults were
					supposed to respond to death maturely and capably, tending to the
					immediate needs of the person in mourning while respecting that
					person’s grieving process. Over the course of the twentieth century,
					death was pulled out of the home and into the hospital. As common
					illnesses became less prevalent because of medical advances, death
					was removed from the natural rhythms of home life and became a source
					of shame. Didion’s own anxieties about exhibiting self-pity lead
					her to focus on this cultural shift. She is acutely aware that she
					feels obligated to respond to John’s death with stoic calm. She
					questions this assumption, trying to determine whether her calm
					exterior is a genuine product of shock or an internalized set of
					cultural expectations. In looking to literature, she tries to ascertain
					what reactions are expected, which reactions are appropriate, and
					how her own reactions fit into those expectations.

Trained as a reader and writer, Didion uses the method
					of poetry analysis that she finds in John’s high school anthology
					as a tool for examining her responses to his death. Though simple
					and direct, the questions that form John’s method resonate profoundly
					with her own experience, as she tries to analyze the meaning and
					experience of each event related to his death, the thought or reflection
					inspired by that experience, and the emotions that are stirred up
					by the experience as a whole. When applied to poetry, the method
					asks the reader to examine the poem and its effects directly, in
					an attempt to understand how individual responses speak to the larger
					emotional experience that the poem creates. Didion realizes that
					she cannot analyze her responses in such a measured way, and that
					each decision she makes is informed by her inability to confront
					John’s passing. By clinging to the idea that she can somehow make
					John come back, Didion cannot step back and analyze her emotional
					responses in the truly analytical way she wants.

