Perhaps because he lives with his dying mother,
Mitch is noticeably more sensitive than Stanley’s other poker friends.
The other men pick on him for being a mama’s boy. Even in his first,
brief line in Scene One, Mitch’s gentlemanly behavior stands out. Mitch
appears to be a kind, decent human being who, we learn in Scene
Six, hopes to marry so that he will have a woman to bring home to
his dying mother.

	Mitch doesn’t fit the bill of the chivalric hero of whom
Blanche dreams. He is clumsy, sweaty, and has unrefined interests
like muscle building. Though sensitive, he lacks Blanche’s romantic
perspective and spirituality, as well as her understanding of poetry
and literature. She toys with his lack of intelligence—for example,
when she teases him in French because she knows he won’t understand—duping
him into playing along with her self-flattering charades.

	Though they come from completely different worlds, Mitch
and Blanche are drawn together by their mutual need of companionship and
support, and they therefore believe themselves right for one another.
They also discover that they have both experienced the death of
a loved one. The snare in their relationship is sexual. As part
of her prim-and-proper act, Blanche repeatedly rejects Mitch’s physical
affections, refusing to sleep with him. Once he discovers the truth
about Blanche’s sordid sexual past, Mitch is both angry and embarrassed
about the way Blanche has treated him. When he arrives to chastise
her, he states that he feels he deserves to have sex with her, even
though he no longer respects her enough to think her fit to be his
wife.

	The difference in Stanley’s and Mitch’s treatment of
Blanche at the play’s end underscores Mitch’s fundamental gentlemanliness. Though
he desires and makes clear that he wants to sleep with Blanche,
Mitch does not rape her and leaves when she cries out. Also, the
tears Mitch sheds after Blanche struggles to escape the fate Stanley
has arranged for her show that he genuinely cares for her. In fact,
Mitch is the only person other than Stella who seems to understand
the tragedy of Blanche’s madness.





Take the Analysis of Major Characters Quick Quiz

