Whereas Jim Conklin’s character remains notably
				steady throughout the novel, Wilson’s undergoes a dramatic change.
				Wilson is initially loud, opinionated, and naïve. For the first
				half of the book, Crane refers to him almost exclusively as “the
				loud soldier.” Wilson indignantly assures Henry that if battle occurs,
				he will certainly fight in it: “I said I was going to do my share
				of the fighting—that’s what I said. And I am, too. Who are you anyhow?
				You talk as if you thought you was Napoleon Bonaparte.” Shortly
				thereafter, he approaches Henry again. Certain that he is about
				to meet his doom, he gives the youth a yellow envelope to deliver
				to his family, should he die in battle. This erratic shift from obnoxious
				bravado to naked vulnerability demonstrates Wilson’s immaturity.
				Like Henry, he is initially little more than a youth trying desperately
				to assure himself of his manhood.

Wilson’s transformation becomes clear relatively
				quickly. After disappearing into battle, he resurfaces to take care
				of Henry with all of the bustling of an “amateur nurse” upon Henry’s
				return to camp. He further displays his generosity by insisting
				that Henry take his blanket. Upon waking the next day, Henry notes
				the change in his friend: “He was no more a loud young soldier.
				There was now about him a fine reliance. He showed a quiet belief
				in his purpose and his abilities.”

Wilson’s attitude toward the envelope which he earlier
				entrusted to Henry further demonstrates the maturation that he has
				undergone. Though ashamed of his earlier display of fear, he asks
				Henry for the envelope back—he is no longer interested in his reputation
				or in the amount of sheer bravery that his comrades associate with
				his name, two issues that ponderously plague Henry. Instead, Wilson seems
				to have “climbed a peak of wisdom from which he could perceive himself
				as a very wee thing.”

This transformation furthers one of the novel’s explorations, showing
				plainly what happens when one realizes the relative insignificance
				of his or her life—an awareness that Henry seems to have gained
				by the novel’s end. Furthermore, the development of Wilson’s character
				contributes to the noise/silence motif. Through the sounds of battle,
				endless gossip, and empty bragging of the soldiers, noise comes
				to be associated with youth, vanity, and struggle. Toward the end
				of the novel, these sounds give way to a peace and quiet that suggest
				the eventuality of the progression past youthful struggle to the
				more reflective musings of manhood.

