Saleem describes the estate that once belonged to an Englishman, William
					Methwold. 

The estate is comprised of four identical houses, each
					bearing the name of a different European palace. Saleem’s parents
					buy one of the houses, agreeing to the conditions that they purchase
					everything inside the house and that the legal transfer of property
					will not occur until midnight, August 15. Methwold says that his
					reasons for the conditions are allegorical, as he equates the sale
					of his estate with the national transfer of sovereign power.

Saleem lists the other inhabitants of Methwold’s Estate:
					Mr. Homi Catrack, a film magnate who lives with his idiot daughter;
					old man Ibrahim, his sons, Ismail and Ishaq, and his wife, Nussie;
					the Dubashes, who become parents of Cyrus, Saleem’s first mentor; Doctor
					Narlikar; and finally, Commander Sabarmati, his wife, Lila, and
					their two sons, who will grow up to be nicknamed Eyeslice and Hairoil.
					As the transfer of power draws closer, the inhabitants of Methwold’s
					Estate complain incessantly of having to live among Methwold’s things.
					As the inhabitants settle in, they remain unaware of the fact that
					they have begun to imitate Methwold’s habits, from the cocktail
					hour he keeps to the accent with which he speaks.

The Times of India announces a prize
					for any child born at the exact moment of independence. Still recalling
					the prophet’s words, Amina declares that her son will win. The summer
					rains begin, and Amina grows so heavy she can scarcely move. After
					the rains end, Wee Willie Winkie, a poor clown, returns to the estate
					to perform for Methwold and the new families. Willie Winkie tells
					the crowd that his wife is expecting a child soon as well. Saleem
					tells us that the child actually belongs to Methwold, who seduced
					Winkie’s wife with his perfectly parted hair. Saleem’s narrative
					then jumps to a church, where a midwife named Mary Pereira sits
					in a confessional booth, telling the young priest about her relationship
					with an orderly named Joseph D’ Costa, who has taken to committing
					acts of violence against the British. Saleem says that on the night
					of his birth, this woman made the most important decision in the
					history of twentieth-century India. Back at Methwold’s Estate, Musa
					is still “ticking like a time-bomb” as the hour approaches midnight. 

On August 13, 1947, Bombay comes alive as the city prepares
					for India’s imminent independence from the British. At midnight,
					the nation of Pakistan will officially be created, a full day before
					India will be declared independent. Violence breaks out on the borders
					of Punjab and in Bengal. 

A series of events occurs all at once, and Saleem’s narrative
					skips between them. At Methwold’s Estate, Ahmed and William Methwold
					drink cocktails in the courtyard. Meanwhile, at the old house on
					Cornwallis Road, in Agra, Aadam Aziz rises from his bed and nostalgically
					pulls out the perforated sheet, only to discover that moths have
					eaten it. Back at Methwold’s Estate, Wee Willie Winkie’s wife, Vanita,
					goes into labor. William Methwold walks into the courtyard of his
					former compound, stands in the exact center, and salutes the landscape.
					Shortly afterward, a sadhuji, or holy man, enters
					the compound and sits under a dripping water tap. He proclaims that
					he awaits the birth of the One, the Mubarak. As soon as he says
					this, Amina goes into labor. Once the sun has set, Methwold ends
					his salute and pulls off his hairpiece. Amina and Vanita lie in
					adjacent rooms at the nursing home, and two boys are born at midnight.
					Upon hearing the news, Ahmed drops a chair on his toes. In the ensuing
					confusion, Mary Pereira switches the babies’ nametags in memory
					of her revolutionary Joseph, giving Saleem, biologically the son
					of Willie Winkie and Vanita, to Ahmed and Amina. 

Padma interrupts the story to call Saleem a liar. He responds
					by saying that even after his parents discovered what Mary Pereira
					had done, they could not go back and erase the past, so he remained
					their son. Saleem mentions a letter the prime minister sent when
					he was born, which he buried in a cactus garden along with a newspaper article
					titled “Midnight’s Child.” He tells us that the newspapermen who
					came to take pictures of him gave his mother a pathetic sum of one
					hundred rupees. 

The small-scale property transfer at Methwold’s Estate
					clearly corresponds to the larger political situation, as Great
					Britain prepares itself to transfer sovereign power over India to
					the independent governments of India and Pakistan. Neither transfer
					is complete or uncomplicated. Just as independent India must now
					deal with the cultural legacy of British colonialism, which remains
					active long after the British vacate the country, so too will the
					inhabitants of Methwold’s Estate have to live with physical reminders
					of the estate’s former owner. The British continue to exert a powerful influence
					over independent India, as symbolized by the unconscious ways the
					Methwold residents begin conforming to Methwold’s customs. Methwold’s
					nostalgia for his estate, in turn, echoes the wide-scale nostalgia
					felt by the British upon leaving the former crown of their colonial
					empire.

As the moment of Saleem’s birth approaches—ostensibly
					the most significant event of the novel thus far—the narrative seems
					to swell to the point of breaking. Saleem wants to take into account everything
					he can, because everything, he believes, has been working in tandem
					to arrive at this exact moment. In order to understand the significance
					of his birth, Saleem reminds the reader of everything that came
					before it and all the family history that went into making Saleem
					who he is. However, after accumulating all this momentum, it becomes
					clear that the history is actually someone else’s history—it
					belongs to Shiva, the boy with whom Saleem gets switched at birth.
					Thus the narrator isn’t actually related at all to the people whose
					stories he has been detailing so meticulously. Significantly, in this
					same chapter, Aadam discovers that the sacred perforated sheet has
					been gnawed full of moth holes. As one of the central symbols of Saleem’s
					story, the partial damage of the perforated sheet seems to bode
					poorly for the truthfulness of the narrative as a whole. 

However, Saleem remains the narrator of this tale, and
					the story still fundamentally belongs to him. That Saleem has told
					this family’s history as if it were his own highlights one of the
					narrative’s central themes: that truth is created and shaped, not
					fixed and static. Regardless of whether he is Ahmed and Amina’s
					biological son, they raise him up in their family, and he enjoys
					all the privileges and problems that birthright entails. Saleem
					can rightfully claim the history he has told as his own, because
					he believes it to be so. The truth of the situation, therefore,
					seems relative. 

At the same time, the fact that William Methwold, an Englishman,
					is revealed to be Saleem’s biological father proves appropriate, given
					that Saleem sees himself as the perfect embodiment of modern India.
					The legacy of British colonialism has undoubtedly shaped the newly
					independent India, just as William Methwold has undeniably shaped
					Saleem. It is also important to note that by switching the nametags,
					Mary Pereira makes a distinct political decision. Alhough her primary
					motivation remains a romantic one, Mary nonetheless attempts to
					redress the vast social divide that separates rich from poor. The
					child of a poor woman who dies in labor and an English father who
					has returned to England, Saleem turns out to be an extraordinarily
					apt representative of the new Indian nation. 

