Lily receives a letter from Snow Flower and, no longer needing to obey her mother-in-law, decides to visit her. On the second night, they are awakened by the smell of fire and the sounds of people fleeing. They hear that the emperor has sent troops to fight the Taipings, and the battle will soon be in Jintian. Lily wants to wait for a palanquin that will take her home, but Snow Flower’s husband refuses to let her wait alone. They travel in a cart as far as they can and then begin walking up into the mountains. Lily’s feet hurt, though she thinks she is lucky compared to other women she sees whose bound feet have broken. Eventually, they join three families under a tree. One of the women, Lotus, tells the story of the Yao people, and how they hid in the mountains and will soon rebuild their home. Lily wonders if they are violating the memory of their ancestors by not fighting on behalf of the Taipings.

After a month in the brutal winter of the mountains, Snow Flower’s butcher husband proves to be useful, as he is able to kill and cook animals. Lily is grateful for his skills that keep them all alive. However, his mother is still abusive, withholding food from Snow Flower’s oldest son whom she believes will die anyway, so Lily shares her portions with him. Lily begins educating Snow Flower’s oldest son, hoping that if Snow Flower changed her own fate, she can change his. Lily is shocked that Snow Flower and her husband continue to make love in the mountains, and Snow Flower becomes pregnant again. Snow Flower suggests that her oldest son marry Lily’s daughter, though Lily refuses a marriage between their two families. 

Even with their miserable conditions, Lily notices that Snow Flower is happy in a way she has not seen in years. However, after ten weeks in the mountains, Snow Flower’s second son dies in his sleep. After grieving for a few days, Snow Flower’s husband buries him. When Snow Flower asks where he is buried, her husband beats her until she miscarries. Lily and the other women tend to Snow Flower, who barely speaks. One day, Snow Flower tells Lily that her husband has beaten her after each of her five miscarriages. Snow Flower says she has wanted to die for a long time and laments the fate of her birth family. Lily only answers her with platitudes about a woman’s role. Snow Flower shows Lily that she brought the fan, as she feared they would die in the mountains. 

The next day, after three months, they are able to return home. While Snow Flower’s husband goes to get Lily’s husband, Lily starts to tell Snow Flower she never thought less of her, but she’s interrupted by Lily’s husband’s arrival. Lily is happy to see him and refuses Snow Flower’s offer of the fan, a gesture made to quell Snow Flower’s sorrows. Lily and her husband head back to Tongkou. [335]

Suffering together in the mountains with people she views as inferior is what equalizes Lily and the others. Rather than looking down on Snow Flower’s husband for what she sees as a barbaric profession, Lily realizes that the butcher’s skills are essential to their survival. Although Lily, like Snow Flower’s mother-in-law, once saw Snow Flower’s eldest son as weak and sickly, she grows to care for him while they are in the mountains, giving him food to help him survive and seeing the potential in him. This experience even makes Lily feel sympathy for the rebels, to the point that she wonders if they should be fighting alongside them for fairer treatment for all. Lily’s experience shows how, in a life-or-death situation, social class has no significance at all.

However, Lily is unable to entirely leave behind her sense of tradition and decorum. She is horrified that Snow Flower and her husband make love in the mountains. As Lily views sex as yet another duty of marriage, only necessary to produce sons, she cannot fathom a satisfying sexual relationship between a husband and wife. Also, although Lily still loves Snow Flower, she immediately refuses Snow Flower’s suggestion that their children get married. Even in the mountains, far from her family, Lily is dismissive of Snow Flower’s social status, and cannot allow her family to be sullied by Snow Flower’s disgrace. Lily is also confused by Snow Flower’s happiness, which perhaps comes from Snow Flower having the companionship of her laotong and not being left to deal with her abusive mother-in-law on her own. However, these feelings are all foreign to Lily, so she does not even attempt to understand or sympathize with them.

Lily continues to show her lack of empathy or understanding of Snow Flower’s life when Snow Flower is at her lowest. Though Snow Flower is suicidal and reveals that she has had more miscarriages than Lily ever knew about, Lily continues advising her to obey her in-laws and reiterating that women must endure suffering. These repeated statements show how out of touch Lily truly is with Snow Flower’s predicament. 

Snow Flower’s decision to bring the fan into the mountains reveals how their laotong relationship is the only bright spot in her life. Lily seems to understand this, as she allows Snow Flower to keep the fan to brighten her spirits after Lily is reunited with her husband. However, this action only shows that Lily views her friendship as a gift to Snow Flower, rather than a relationship of equals. By not taking the fan, Lily demonstrates that she doesn’t need Snow Flower the way Snow Flower needs her, which goes against the basis of their relationship. This shows how Lily still views love as a transactional relationship, just as she did when she was a young child, hoping that by being obedient, she could earn love from her mother or Snow Flower. However, this is not the sort of relationship she and Snow Flower once agreed on, and it is not what Snow Flower needs to make her happy.

