By May of 1864,
					General Sherman’s Yankee army has fought its way into Georgia and
					is dangerously close to Atlanta. Rhett infuriates Dr. Meade by declaring
					that the Confederacy will not hold the Yankees back. Everyone in
					Atlanta clings to a faith in the Confederacy. As the war creeps
					closer, the trains deliver wounded and dying soldiers by the thousands.
					Scarlett feels that she can no longer bear her work and sneaks away
					from the hospital. She encounters Rhett, who is impeccably dressed
					despite the wartime scarcity. He drives her back to Peachtree Street.
					On the way, they encounter a group of marching slaves, and Scarlett
					recognizes Big Sam, the old foreman at Tara. He tells her proudly
					that the slaves are being sent to dig trenches for the gentlemen
					and women to hide in when the Yankees come. Scarlett knows that
					they are really digging the trenches for the Confederate army to
					fight off the Yankees. Rhett drives on and teases Scarlett about
					how she must secretly want him to kiss her. He says he does not
					make advances toward her because she childishly clings to her love
					for Ashley. Scarlett becomes so angry that she makes Rhett stop
					the carriage and let her out.

Atlanta is under siege, and even old men and young boys
					are called upon to fight. John Wilkes, Ashley’s elderly father,
					joins the militia. Gerald stays home only because of his bad knee.
					The Yankees outnumber the Confederates, and dying soldiers pour
					into the city, collapsing on lawns and crowding into houses. The
					citizens of Atlanta begin to flee in panic, and Pittypat joins the
					exodus to Macon. Scarlett longs to go home to Tara, but she must
					remain with Melanie, who is too pregnant to relocate. Scarlett knows
					nothing about childbirth, but Prissy says that she has helped with
					many deliveries.

The Yankees sever all rail lines but one. Shells hammer
					Atlanta. Scarlett is frantic and Melanie lies in bed sick. Uncle
					Henry stops by on a leave of absence to tell Scarlett that John
					Wilkes has been killed. Rhett finds Scarlett crying on her porch.
					He tells her that he likes her but does not love her and asks if
					she will become his mistress. Scarlett storms upstairs furiously.

After thirty days of siege, quiet falls. The Yankees move
					to capture the Jonesboro rail line, which lies very near Tara. Scarlett’s
					terror grows when she receives a letter from Gerald saying that
					Ellen and both of Scarlett’s sisters have typhoid fever. By the
					first of September, Scarlett does not know whether the Yankees are
					at Tara or whether her family is still alive. She longs to go home,
					but she will not break her promise to Ashley by leaving Melanie.
					Melanie tells Scarlett the baby will come very soon and makes Scarlett
					promise to take the baby if Melanie dies.

Throughout Part Two, Mitchell builds suspense by focusing
					on the war as it inches closer to Atlanta. She describes every new
					development in the war, which begins to take on central importance
					in the lives of the characters. When the battle at Gettysburg begins,
					the characters and the narrator start paying closer attention to
					news of the war. Nearly every family Scarlett knows loses a relative,
					and she herself knows many of the boys who die. After the battle
					of Gettysburg, the war takes a decisive turn in favor of the Yankees,
					and the old carefree optimism fades from Atlanta. The city runs
					short on food and clothing. Scarlett, once so blithely ignorant
					about the war, now feels surrounded by its effects. Ashley is captured,
					and masses of injured men fill the hospital where Scarlett works—she
					cannot escape the war’s horrors. Mitchell shows us the war as Scarlett
					sees it, describing the progress of the conflict but never depicting
					a single battle scene. 

	In 1864,
					Ulysses S. Grant, the commanding general of the Union army, dispatched
					General William Tecumseh Sherman with a force of 100,000 men
					to topple the last stronghold of the Confederacy, the relatively
					untouched states of Georgia and the Carolinas. After conquering
					Atlanta, Sherman set out on his famous march “from Atlanta to the
					sea.” During his march, Sherman broke the backbone of Confederate
					resistance and paved the way for Northern victory. Sherman, who
					is also credited with the saying “War is hell,” considered it his
					duty not merely to defeat the Confederate army but to crush the
					South beyond repair. As a result, his troops waged economic warfare
					against the people they conquered, destroying property, confiscating
					food and livestock, burning crops and houses, and damaging railroad
					systems. This scorched-earth campaign won Sherman a fearsome reputation
					throughout the South. The characters in Gone with the Wind circulate
					many horror stories about Yankees, accusing them of rape, dismemberment,
					and burning. Their stories reflect the ravages wrought by Sherman’s
					commitment to all-out destruction.

	Even though Rhett insists that he does not love Scarlett,
					his romantic interest in her becomes increasingly evident. Rhett
					realizes that Scarlett is stuck in Atlanta looking after a woman
					she despises, and he teases her about this morbidly humorous situation.
					Rhett’s nonchalance and mockery infuriate Scarlett and wound her
					pride, but Rhett intrigues her. She and Rhett share many of the
					same shockingly unconventional views, although only Rhett admits them.
					Rhett belittles prominent Atlanta figures whom Scarlett secretly
					despises, and he speaks frankly about the lack of Southern patriotism,
					a lack that Scarlett notices as well. Rhett sees through Scarlett’s
					artifice and knows she shares his unpopular opinions. Rhett knows
					that Scarlett’s girlish flirtations hide a selfish heart, a perception
					that leaves Scarlett powerless to control him as she controls other
					men. She despises him, but she also wants to win him. Mitchell shows
					us Rhett’s confidence, sense of humor, and intelligence, and we
					begin to wonder whether Rhett is the evil tempter everyone thinks
					him or the perfect match for Scarlett.

