A wealthy British bachelor. Fogg spends his days gambling with friends at the social club and then spends his nights alone. Nobody knows much about him and he is considered an eccentric. Fogg enjoys an orderly life that follows a strict daily schedule until he makes a bet with his fellow club members that he can circle the world in eighty days.

Read an in-depth analysis of Fogg.

A French valet with many former jobs, including singer, circus performer, gym teacher, and fireman. Passepartout arrives in London hoping to find a quieter, more settled life. He feels relieved when he finds himself at the orderly, quiet house of Phileas Fogg, and he joins Fogg on his journey around the world.

Read an in-depth analysis of Passepartout.

A detective with the London police force. Convinced that Phileas Fogg is behind a recent bank robbery, the London police chief sends Detective Fix to follow Fogg while they issue a warrant for Fogg’s arrest. Fix is determined to catch Fogg and hopes to collect a reward out of the stolen money.

Read an in-depth analysis of Fix.

The orphaned daughter of a rich merchant from Bombay. Aouda is forced to marry an old rajah, or Indian prince, after her father dies. When her husband dies, Aouda is sentenced to be burned alive with him as a sacrifice to the gods. She falls in love with Phileas Fogg after he rescues her.

Read an in-depth analysis of Aouda.

The group of men with whom Phileas Fogg spends his days at the club. They mostly play whist, a card game of risk and chance. The members include Andrew Stuart, an engineer; bankers John Sullivan and Samuel Fallentin; Thomas Flanagan, a beer brewer; and Gautier Ralph, the director of the Bank of England. They are convinced Fogg will lose his bet with them to circle the world in eighty days.

An English army officer stationed in India. He knows India well and is able to guide Fogg and his party through the particular terrain and customs of India. Fogg meets Cromarty on the train from Bombay to Calcutta, where they play whist, Fogg’s favorite game.

A member of the group of followers of the Iranian prophet Zoroaster who sought refuge in India. Fogg asks a Parsee guide to sell him his elephant and guide him to the train station. At first, the young guide doesn’t want to sell the animal, but he eventually agrees. Fogg gifts him back his elephant at the end of the trip.

An English captain stationed in Hong Kong. He carries Fogg and his party on his ship Tankadere to Shanghai.

A group of circus performers Passepartout joins in Japan on their last performance before leaving for America. Passepartout performs with them to make money for food.

A rugged American man Fogg and his group meet at a political rally in San Francisco. Colonel Proctor is a tall, broad-shouldered, and rough-mannered man. He deeply offends Fogg and Fix when he punches Fix at the rally. Colonel Proctor challenges Fogg to a duel when they meet again on a train.

Two candidates for the justice of the peace position in San Francisco. A rally forms in San Francisco over their race, which quickly turns into a brawl.

A Mormon who preaches aboard trains to attract followers. He corners Passepartout in a train car in Utah to ask him to join his religion.

An American sledge driver who agrees to take Fogg and his party to Omaha in exchange for a reward.

Captain of a ship called the Henrietta. He never carries passengers and sternly denies Fogg’s request to take him and his group across the Atlantic. He tells Fogg, “Money means nothing to me,” but then he relents when Fogg offers to pay him a large sum.

Fogg’s previous servant, who is fired for bringing Fogg shaving water that is two degrees too cold.

The only man who bets on Fogg, even after Fogg is accused of robbery.

The man who actually committed the robbery at the bank, the crime for which Fogg is blamed. Strand is caught by the end of the story, and his capture exonerates Fogg’s name.

The reverend who marries Fogg and Aouda.

