Continuing on his journey, Christian comes to a wall that
					the narrator identifies as Salvation. The wall fences in a field
					of rising land containing a cross and a sepulcher, or tomb. Passing
					by the wall, Christian feels his burden spontaneously drop to the
					ground. Amazed and relieved that the sight of the cross has eased
					his burden, Christian stands and cries for a while. The three Shining
					Ones appear and hand Christian a rolled-up certificate he will need
					one day to enter the Celestial City.

Proceeding onward along the “strait and narrow” path of
					the wall of Salvation, Christian notices three figures—Simple, Sloth, and
					Presumption—asleep and bound with iron chains. He warns these figures
					that they must go on their way, but they want only to go back to
					sleep. Christian then sees two figures scrambling over the wall
					instead of following the narrow path as he did. Their names are Formalist
					and Hypocrisy, and they come from the town of Vain-Glory; they are
					headed to Mount Zion for praise. Christian accuses them of cheating
					by climbing over the wall, calling them thieves in the eyes of God,
					but they disagree.

Christian ascends a hill called Difficulty. There he finds
					a pleasant arbor where he decides to rest. He takes his rolled certificate from
					his chest pocket and falls asleep. Two men awaken him, warning of
					lions in the area. Christian is unsure what to do. He cannot go back
					where he came from, but he is scared of the lions. When Christian
					reaches for his certificate, he finds it missing. Reproaching himself
					for sleeping in the daytime and being careless, he calls sleep sinful.
					After retracing his steps, Christian finds his certificate and vows
					always to remain watchful. He catches a glimpse of the pilgrims’
					hostel where he will take shelter, called the Palace Beautiful (House
					Beautiful in some editions).

Arriving late at the pilgrims’ hotel, Christian has lost
					much time sleeping. The porter is skeptical about letting him in,
					and one of the lodge owner’s four daughters, Discretion, asks who
					he is. After Christian identifies himself, Discretion allows him
					inside. The three other daughters, Piety, Prudence, and Charity,
					ask about Christian’s journey. They also ask about Christian’s family
					and why he left them behind. He weeps when talking about his wife
					and sons. Finally they eat, and the four women take Christian on
					a tour of the lodge, showing him mementos from the history of Christianity,
					including the slingshot with which David killed Goliath. They give
					Christian weapons for protection. Christian learns that a fellow
					townsman named Faithful has passed by in the meantime.

The four mistresses of the Palace Beautiful accompany
					Christian to the end of their property and give him food for his
					journey. They warn him of the slippery ground he will enter, called
					the Valley of Humiliation. Walking through the valley, Christian
					sees a foul monster approaching, a human form with dragon wings
					and bear feet, covered in fish scales. Christian is scared but does
					not flee. The monster’s name is Apollyon, and he claims Christian
					as his subject, since Christian is on his land. Christian refutes
					him, saying he is already subject to a different prince, meaning
					Christ. Apollyon flies into a rage, voicing hatred for the rival
					prince. They fight with swords, and Apollyon nearly kills Christian,
					but Christian at the last minute saves himself and strikes Apollyon,
					who flies away.

Continuing onward, Christian finds himself in the Valley
					of the Shadow of Death, a hot desert full of pits. The narrator
					comments that this is where the mouth of hell is located. Christian
					realizes there is more danger for him here than his fight with Apollyon
					and hears the demons clamoring for him. He is deeply afraid but
					takes solace in the thought that Christ is protecting him like a
					candle in the dark. At the end of the valley, Christian sees the
					bones, ashes, and mangled remains of other pilgrims. The area is
					lorded over by two giants, Pope and Pagan, who devoured earlier
					pilgrims. Christian is not afraid, since they are both decrepit
					and unthreatening.

Faith is given a deeper meaning when Christian’s burden
					spontaneously falls from the sight of the cross in the Third Stage.
					This removal of the burden marks a new perspective on his progress. Clearly
					faith depends on striving. Christian has undertaken many risks already
					to get where he is, and his way is far from easy. Yet faith also
					involves changes that require no effort at all, like the miraculous
					relief from the burden. Christian does not even have to remove the
					burden, since it removes itself. In Christian doctrine, these two parts
					of the pilgrim’s experience are known as will and grace. Will is the
					exertion required to find faith and master oneself. Grace is what comes
					without trying to get it, a pure gift from heaven. Christian experiences
					both will and grace when passing the cross, and he is rewarded for
					his strong individual faith when the burden falls.

The certificate that Christian receives from the three
					Shining Ones emphasizes the first appearance of the written word
					in The
Pilgrim’s Progress since
					the very beginning when Christian was seen crying with a book in
					his hand. This written document has great value, since it is the
					entry ticket to the Celestial City. Readers are reminded that however
					action-packed Christian’s tale is, the action only draws its meaning
					from the written word, which reveals divine truth. Symbolically
					it is key that Christian loses his burden at the same moment he
					is handed his certificate of entry. The physical burden is in a
					way transformed into printed words, and the heavy impediment is
					transformed into a promise of progress and achievement.

The moment when Christian wakes up and learns of his lost
					certificate is one of the subtlest and most important scenes in The
						Pilgrim’s Progress, for it shows Christian’s dawning awareness
					that he could be his own worst enemy. Christian’s accepting of the
					certificate also marks a new phase in his mission, one that demands
					a higher level of watchful care and self-control than he needed
					before. Earlier, he could not shake his burden because it was attached
					to his back. He now knows the certificate can be lost, as he learns
					when he falls asleep. Christian also realizes that losing the certificate
					could lead to spiritual disaster, and this explains why he calls
					sleep sinful. External enemies like Apollyon abound in the book,
					but Christian’s own inattention and laziness are dangers just as
					great. No one stole Christian’s certificate from him; he lost it
					himself, which is even more alarming for a pilgrim who must be master
					of his own fate.

The appearance of Hypocrisy and Formalist emphasize the
					religious nature of Christian’s journey. Formalist, whose name refers
					to anyone who sees the outward form or appearance of faith as being more
					important than the inward experience, feels that getting to a destination
					is all that matters. So Formalist cheats and climbs over the wall
					of Salvation. To him, the only important thing is that he has arrived
					at the same place Christian is standing. Hypocrisy believes in saying
					the “right” thing but doing otherwise. Christian’s harsh words to
					both of these fake pilgrims are enlightening. Christian understands
					his journey as far more of an inward progress than a geographical
					one. He knows truth matters more to his progress than mere motion
					does.

Christian’s stay in the Palace Beautiful offers a glimpse
					of comfort and rest for the first time on the journey. Even when
					Christian was back at home with his family, he was neither comforted
					nor rested, since he was torn by spiritual crisis. The four beautiful daughters
					of the palace’s owner make the refuge a female space. They are the
					first women characters in the book, not counting the brief reference
					to Christian’s wife early on, and they are associated with peace,
					calm, nourishment, and safety. Yet they are not passive figures.
					On the contrary, their astute conversation with Christian the first
					evening displays their active and engaged intelligence. Their gift
					of protective military gear also shows that they understand the perils
					of faith-related battle.

Though Apollyon’s presence is brief in The Pilgrims’
						Progress, the monster’s appearance is both dominant and
					unforgettable. He is one of the best-known characters and is often
					referred to in later English literature. Indeed, Bunyan here almost
					approaches science fiction with this beast covered in scales and
					with bear feet and dragon wings. Apollyon has medieval overtones.
					When Apollyon claims Christian as his own, he acts like a feudal
					baron. The sword combat with Christian harkens back to medieval
					dragon-slaying tales. When Christian defeats him, the combat portion
					of his progress is complete. Christian never fights anyone again
					in the book. Leaving behind the old tales of physical combat, Christian
					is free to go on to face more spiritual hardships.

