The chapter opens at midday, the day after the man’s appearance. Margaret
					is in her room thinking about the part of her childhood that she
					spent in a trailer, and she thinks how her beauty both has and has
					not taken her far from this period, given that she has locked herself
					into her trailer-sized bedroom. Recalling last night’s events, she
					remains angry with Valerian for ignoring her trauma and for inviting
					the man to dinner. She regards the intruder with disgust and believes
					that he intended to rape her and likely did sexually disgusting
					things in her closet. Margaret wishes Jadine would come cheer her
					up, and she also longs for Michael’s arrival because she feels that he
					alone puts her at real ease.

Meanwhile, in her own room, Jadine shows Ondine a coat
					made of ninety sealskins that Ryk has sent her. Ondine asks if the
					coat means that Jadine will marry Ryk, and Jadine says she is unsure. When
					Ondine expresses agitation about the stranger in the house, Jadine
					tries to calm her. Once Ondine leaves, Jadine begins to wrap her
					Christmas presents. She thinks about whether to buy Michael a Christmas
					present because of her complicated relation to the Streets, as she
					is very close to them and at the same time is their dependent. Her
					thoughts also turn to Ondine and how she seems unnerved by Jadine’s
					prospective marriage to a white man and by the possibility of leaving
					the island. Jadine worries that Ondine and Sydney rely too much
					on her for solutions to their problems. She remembers how Valerian
					conducted himself so gallantly during dinner with the stranger and
					how little information they had gained from his evasive answers,
					including his name. This man is now staying in the guest room at
					Valerian’s invitation.

While Jadine is in her room thinking, Ondine is in the
					kitchen cooking. Gideon enters to drop off a chicken he killed and
					then leaves. Ondine is irritated that he did not pluck the chicken’s
					feathers. She reflects that in her youth she would have caught the
					chicken herself, but now she is too old and slow. She begins to
					pluck the chicken, and Sydney comes in. He begins to talk about
					how angry he is with Valerian for letting the man stay in the house
					because he is worried about the safety of his family. He expresses
					particular anxiety about the fact that Jadine’s room is right next
					to the guest room where the man slept, and Ondine tries to calm
					him down. She tells Sydney that they are too old to find new jobs,
					so he needs be patient with Valerian’s actions. She also mentions
					feeling that while Jadine is in the house, nothing bad can befall
					them. Sydney leaves, and Ondine continues to cook, thinking about
					how the man is not like her or Sydney and is, instead, a stranger.
					She then considers that if he stays in the house as a guest of Valerian’s,
					it will make her mad to serve him.

Out in the yard, Thérèse, one of the “Marys” who comes
					to do work with Gideon, does the laundry, eats lunch, and thinks
					about the man who had been sneaking into the Streets’ house for
					food in the evenings. She and Gideon knew he was in the house before
					anyone else did, and she had been leaving food for him. In her imagination,
					he is one of the island’s mythical wild horsemen, a descendant of
					the first slaves who were brought to the island. While she is daydreaming
					about this, Gideon arrives and tells her that the Streets have discovered
					the man and that now he is a guest in the house. She suggests that
					he has come to carry Jadine away, and she continues to propose fantasies
					until she reaches the point at which she can no longer express her
					ideas logically.

While she rambles, Gideon thinks about his past and how
					he spent a lot of time trying to make his fortune in the United
					States but was tricked into returning to the island by Thérèse.
					Gideon regrets coming back and marrying Thérèse, and he feels foolish
					that he returned to the island without any more wealth than he left
					it with. Thérèse stops her daydreaming when she realizes that none
					of her stories include a role for the Streets, and she realizes
					that she has difficulty imagining what they do, think, or feel.
					She does not even know their names.

Back in her bedroom, Jadine continues to delight in her
					sealskin coat. She finds its suppleness seductive, almost overwhelmingly
					so. After admiring the coat, she goes to take a shower. When Jadine emerges,
					the man is in her room and his appearance startles her. His hair
					in particular, with its long, unkempt dreadlocks, frightens her. She
					now sees the man as Margaret must have seen him—as a figure of menace.
					Collecting herself, she begins to talk to him and asks him his name,
					which he still does not reveal. He looks at pictures of her from
					when she was a model, nicknamed “the Copper Venus.” Jadine tells
					him things about modeling that make it seem very glamorous. She
					also tells him that Valerian and Margaret support her. He thinks
					she is very beautiful, and he remembers when he was hiding how he
					used to sneak into her room to watch her sleep. He stopped doing
					this when he began to worry that he smelled like a wild animal and
					that his smell would wake her up.

The man snaps himself out of his reverie by asking her
					how many sexual favors she had to perform to advance her modeling
					career. Shocked, Jadine hits him in the face. He grabs her wrists,
					and she spits at him and tries to kick him, but he is much stronger
					than she and stops her. Disgusted, she tells him that he smells
					terrible and that if he rapes her, he will be killed. He responds
					by saying he has no interest in raping a white girl like her. She
					curses him out for calling her white and for trying to tell her
					how a black woman should be and act. She also tells him he smells
					like an animal, and he presses himself against her and tells her
					he can smell her too, and then he releases her. Jadine says she
					will tell Valerian what he did, and he says to go ahead but to leave
					out the fact that he told her he smelled her.

She leaves her room and goes outside, where the gravel
					hurts her feet because all she is wearing are thin gold slippers.
					Resolving to tell Valerian what happened in her bedroom, Jadine
					feels she will have to omit the man’s question about sexual favors
					and the discussion of smell. A mix of fear and shame hit her as
					she considers the whole encounter, and then she thinks about her
					childhood in Baltimore. As a child, she resolved never to let men
					break her after she saw a female dog be mounted by male dogs and
					then be punished for it. Her anger is directed toward Valerian for
					the situation with the man, but she also wonders if she is overreacting
					and considers the complicated issues of race and racial affiliation
					that the episode with the man raised. Finally she decides to go
					speak with Valerian, but she finds him laughing with the man.

Many of the conflicts in this chapter, and in the book
					as a whole, revolve around race and racial identity. The man’s appearance
					in the house is like a spotlight that illuminates preexisting tensions
					among the characters. His presence illuminates the resentment that
					Sydney harbors toward Valerian, Jadine’s uncertain relationship
					to race, and Margaret’s deep-seated racism and paranoia. The man’s
					physical appearance and removal from culture, embodied by his wild, dreadlocked
					hair and his refusal to give a name, associate him with nature and
					a wild blackness that some characters reject and others find alluring.
					Ondine and Sydney have rejected this blackness in their life and
					profession, and they resent Valerian for treating this black man
					than how he treats them. They see themselves as superior to the
					man, which is why they do not want to treat him as a guest in the
					house. Sydney and Ondine lump him into the same group as Gideon
					and Thérèse—local blacks whom they regard as being far beneath them.
					Jadine feels uncomfortable around the man because she recognizes
					that, like the woman in the yellow dress, he embodies true blackness.
					Their immediate judgment of the man implies their own struggle with
					race and racial identity.

Jadine’s clothing demonstrates her twisted attitude toward nature
					and its wild blackness. The coat is made of dead animals, a fact
					that symbolizes the domestication of nature. The fact that the coat
					is a gift from her white boyfriend, Ryk, also indicates the dominance
					of humans over nature. The coat is black, and there are also many
					loving descriptions of the seductiveness of its color and texture.
					Jadine’s sexual relationship to the coat, and the way that sexual
					allure makes it fearful to her, indicates her desire for nature
					but also her fear of it. Even an object made of dead, inanimate
					nature is perhaps too powerful for her. The thin golden slippers
					that Jadine wears when she flees her room after her interaction
					with the man represent a loss of contact with nature. Jadine’s feet
					are soft, and she does not even know how to prepare herself for
					leaving the comfort and safety of the house. This uncertainty also
					implies that she does not know how to survive outside in the natural
					world.

Jadine’s conversation with the man also emphasizes her
					fraught relationship with nature and blackness. A symbol of wild
					nature, the man exemplifies authentic blackness. Jadine feels physically overpowered
					by the man’s hair because she is not used to seeing such wild, messy
					hair around her comfortable surroundings. The appearance of the
					man’s hair shocks Jadine so that she becomes both attracted to and
					fearful toward him. Jadine sees the man as an authentic black man
					who is violent, rebellious, uncivilized, and everything that she
					is not, which somehow excites her. Yet she fights her attraction
					toward him because of her alliance with European culture. Jadine
					feels the same about the man as she does toward the woman in the
					yellow dress: They both represent “true blackness” to her, and Jadine
					cannot help but envy them, despite not wanting to be that way herself.

The man clearly recognizes that Jadine does not embody
					true blackness and exploits his realization by seizing the upper
					hand in their interaction. After demeaning her sexually, he purposefully calls
					her a white girl to provoke her, and when she reacts angrily by telling
					him that she can smell him, he reminds her of her own animal nature
					by telling her that he can also smell her. His association with nature
					is apparent when Jadine describes his voice as speaking to her from
					above trees and at a great height. Jadine’s memory of the female
					dog she saw as a child who was sniffed and mounted by male dogs
					and then punished displays a fear of being treated horribly by men.
					All her life, Jadine has fought to not become that dog, to not let men
					do that to her. And now that a man has slipped into the house and
					behaved in this manner toward her, Jadine realizes that she is attracted
					to this ill treatment.

The man is not the figure of pure black animal menace
					that Jadine perceives him to be. The revelation that he has been
					watching her sleep over the past weeks as he hides in the house
					shows that he is deeply attracted to her, despite his violent and
					cruel actions toward her. He has also been ashamed of his animal
					smell, which displays his own insecurities when he stops watching
					Jadine sleep at night. In light of this fact, his question of how
					many sexual favors Jadine had to perform to get ahead is a clear
					indication of the depth of his self-hatred. He asks Jadine this
					question because he is frustrated with how much easier it seems
					for a black woman to get ahead in the white, civilized world. The
					man lacks power in this world. Throughout the novel, the man is
					given power by his closeness to authentic black culture, but he
					is also trapped by this closeness and unable to adapt to the broader,
					white-dominated world.

The introduction of Gideon and of Thérèse presents another
					perspective on the life of the house. Unlike the other characters,
					they have an entirely different view of the members of the household. Sydney
					and Ondine look down on them because they are less civilized, and
					this opinion is very obvious when they call Gideon “Yardman” and
					Thérèse “Mary.” Gideon and Thérèse provide another level of commentary,
					and their priorities are very different from the others. The “chocolate-eater,”
					as they call the man, is the protagonist of the story that Thérèse
					narrates. In her mind the world revolves around him and his relationship
					to the mysterious and beautiful Jadine. Ondine and Sydney, as domesticated
					blacks, are known quantities, and thus uninteresting. As for the
					whites, she cares as much about them as they do about her, which
					is to say not at all. Neither party in that relationship has bothered
					to learn the other’s names. While Ondine and Sydney represent the
					experience of American blacks, in which whites play an inevitable
					and prominent role, for the island blacks, the whites are simply
					outsiders who pass through and present nothing of significance.

The characters’ various nicknames for one another emphasize the
					importance of identity. A name is an indicator of relationship and
					of place. On one hand, the people of the house all call the women
					who come with Gideon “Mary” because everyone on Queen of France
					has “Mary” in her name. (They are all equally vaguely Catholic.)
					Gideon is called “Yardman” because that is what a person from the
					island who does work is called. Aside from the tasks he performs,
					he is unimportant. On the other hand, Thérèse does not know Sydney’s,
					Ondine’s, or the Streets’ real names, because aside from the jobs
					they provide, the Americans do not play any role in her life. Jadine’s
					nickname “the Copper Venus” indicates her problematic relationship
					with race. She wants to be perceived as authentically black, but
					she also desires to be valued for her self and not just her race.
					This name perfectly captures that contradiction: “Copper” is intended
					as a compliment because it is not black but also
					because the color is more exotic than just white. Her name both insists
					that she is black and also that she is not black enough to be threatening.
					The nicknames indicate the characters’ perceived identities of one
					another. These identities are only based on outward appearances,
					not on the characters’ closeness with each other.

