Andrés rides through the night to deliver Robert Jordan’s
					dispatch to General Golz. He thinks about his feeling of relief
					when Robert Jordan asked him to deliver his message—relief because
					killing thrills Andrés in a way that embarrasses him. He
					remembers having the same feeling of exhilaration and embarrassment
					on his town’s annual bull-baiting day, in which, by tradition, he
					was expected to bite the bull by the ear. He also remembers feeling
					the same sense of relief if the bull-baiting ever was canceled.
					Andrés arrives at a checkpoint.

Robert Jordan lies next to Maria, seething with
					anger at Pablo and reproaching himself for letting Pablo steal from
					his packs. He forces himself to let go of his anger. Calm, he thinks
					about how to blow up the bridge without enough people, horses, or
					weapons, and now without the mechanism for properly detonating the
					dynamite. Robert Jordan whispers to the sleeping Maria that they
					can still finish the mission. They will all be killed, he thinks,
					but they will complete their task. He tells Maria that a good night’s
					sleep will be her wedding present.

At the checkpoint, the guards challenge, insult, and threaten
					to shoot Andrés. After much wrangling, Andrés finally convinces
					them that his mission is legitimate. One of the guards takes Andrés’s
					gun and escorts him down the hill.

Robert Jordan and Maria lie in bed just before three in
					the morning. He licks her ear, and she wakes up. They make love,
					and once again they experience a simultaneous orgasm and feel the
					earth move. Maria calls this state “la gloria.” They talk about
					how lucky they are to have found each other. Robert Jordan thinks
					that these people—Maria, Pilar, Anselmo, Agustín—are his family,
					and that he has been here at the fort his whole life. He thinks
					about how much he has learned.

Before dawn, the guerrilla fighters eat breakfast and
					nervously prepare for the attack later that day. Robert Jordan plans
					to use hand grenades to make up for the stolen explosives. He thinks
					that they have too few men and that the attack will fail. He struggles
					to overcome his anger at Pablo. Pilar tells Robert Jordan that she
					cares about him very much and that he should forget about how troubled she
					seemed after reading his palm. 

Pablo suddenly returns to the camp. He has thrown the
					explosives he stole into the river but has brought five men with
					their horses from neighboring guerrilla bands. He explains that
					he left in a moment of weakness and that he felt great loneliness
					after he threw the explosives in the river. Although Pilar compares
					Pablo to Judas Iscariot (the biblical apostle who betrays Jesus),
					both Pilar and Robert Jordan are relieved that Pablo has returned. 

Having packed up the camp, the guerrilla fighters begin
					to take their positions for the bridge operation. Though Robert
					Jordan doesn’t believe in luck, he takes Pablo’s return as a positive
					sign. He engages in brief conversations with Pablo and Maria. Pilar
					recognizes and greets two of the five men that have come with Pablo. 

Robert Jordan’s competent behavior under difficult circumstances in
					this section fits him in to a line of Hemingway protagonists who exhibit
					what Hemingway calls “grace under pressure.” Nowhere more than here
					does Robert Jordan display this virtue of the code hero. With Pablo
					gone and the explosives stolen, Robert Jordan manages to control
					his anger and apply himself to solving the new, more difficult problem
					of destroying the bridge with less manpower and fewer explosives.
					Always supremely pragmatic, Robert Jordan neither dwells on the
					past nor fears the future but instead concentrates on the present
					situation. This focus on the present allows him to savor fully the
					physical pleasures that fate grants him—the smell of pine trees,
					the taste of absinthe, sex with Maria. It also enables him not to
					fear death, which is the code hero’s true antagonist. Ultimately,
					Robert Jordan’s level-headedness is the only force that holds the
					guerrilleros together in the face of daunting odds.

The words “now” and “one,” which dominate Robert Jordan’s consciousness
					during his lovemaking with Maria on the morning of the attack, point
					to his appreciation of life in the present and the wholeness of
					their communion with each other. The present “now” is the only time
					that he has with Maria, for they barely have a past, and the future
					is uncertain. Robert Jordan frequently thinks that he is living
					his whole, full life in the seventy hours portrayed in For Whom
						the Bell Tolls. When focusing on the present, Robert Jordan sees
					the “now” as representing “now and before and always.” He stops
					thinking about the future and the probability of his death—in a
					sense, he transcends death and becomes temporarily immortal. This
					immortality becomes possible through Maria’s idea that Robert Jordan
					and she are “one” person. And indeed, the word “one” pervades their
					conversation after sex. Robert Jordan and Maria’s communion is complete,
					blessed and sealed by the natural forces that move the earth. Robert
					Jordan’s new feelings—his growing thoughts about the concept of
					“now” and his feeling of being “one” with Maria—are rather non-scientific
					and non-rational. As the novel draws to its close, we see that Robert
					Jordan gradually moves toward accepting and embracing Pilar’s brand
					of mysticism and supernatural wisdom.

Hemingway’s description of Andrés baiting the bull emphasizes the
					connection between death and sex in the novel. Andrés remembers
					how “he lay on the hot, dusty, bristly, tossing slope of the muscle,
					the ear clenched tight in his teeth, and drove his knife again and again
					and again into the swelling, tossing bulge of the neck that was now
					spouting hot on his fist.” The strong sexual overtones are unmistakable,
					especially in “spouting hot” and “again and again and again,” which
					echoes the rhythm of the passages about Robert Jordan and Maria’s
					lovemaking. The high that Andrés experiences after bull-baiting
					is a sexual one, which explains both its addictiveness and the sense
					of shame that accompanies it. Importantly, the realm in which Andrés
					gained his experience in killing—bull-baiting—was a relatively controlled
					environment. The experience of killing under his belt, Andrés knows
					how to recognize the urge to kill and consequently how to control
					it. But Pablo’s first experience with killing was the massacre of
					the Fascists in his town. He never had the opportunity to face his
					cruelty in a controlled environment and never learned to control
					his passions, which makes him dangerous. In connecting bloodlust
					and sexual lust in this manner throughout the novel, Hemingway implies
					that the desire for violence is as common a sensation as sexual
					desire—a bold statement about human nature.

