Nnu Ego starts out as an innocent, somewhat naïve girl filled with hope
				and anticipation of the joys and rewards motherhood will bring her. Unlike her
				mother, Ona, Nnu Ego is not a radical or antagonistic presence, and she
				dutifully accepts and fulfills her role as a woman in Ibo society. Her initial
				quest is for justification and validation. When she cannot conceive with her
				first husband, Amatokwu, the marriage is dissolved and she is filled with
				apprehension and shame. When her second marriage, to Nnaife, produces a highly
				prized son, she realizes the happiness denied her, only to have her joy
				shattered when Ngozi dies in infancy. The death of the child becomes, by
				extension, the death of Nnu Ego. She sees no reason to live if she cannot
				succeed in the single role of bearing and rearing children. Slowly, she comes to
				new realizations about what is truly important to her, and these epiphanies
				force her to re-examine her role and function as a woman in Ibo society.

Though she is distraught over the death of Ngozi, Nnu Ego feels guilty
				relief when, later, a daughter arrives stillborn. She begins to examine her
				essential worth as a woman. Although she becomes a vital economic force in the
				community, essentially setting up her own business to help her family survive,
				she is seen as merely an economic unit, a machine for producing and rearing male
				heirs. Nnu Ego comes to believe that aspirations of being solely a mother and
				provider are too limiting and dispiriting. Rather than looking forward to a
				quiet life where she will be well provided for by her sons and daughters, she is
				a victim of her times, caught at a critical turning point in West-African social
				history. Rather than serving the collective unit of the family, her children
				pursue their own courses and seek to place their own self-fulfillment and
				individual destinies before their family responsibilities. Nnu Ego’s hope and
				joy become disillusionment as she dies, alone, at the side of the road, an
				ambivalent figure with little to show for her years of selflessness and
				sacrifice.

