Standing free outside the Staja, Alex recounts his last
					day in the treatment center, which was full of press conferences
					and humiliating demonstrations. This morning, the center has all
					but kicked him out. Left with little more than an empty stomach,
					Alex goes to a nearby blue-collar café for breakfast. There, he
					sits in the corner by himself and reads the newspaper. Apparently
					a government publication, the paper details the current administration’s
					various successes, urging the reader to reelect it when the next
					General Election is held in two weeks. Alex notes an article about
					the improved police force with interest, but as he turns the page,
					a photograph of a familiar-looking person grabs his attention. The
					picture is of Alex himself, as well as one of the Minister, and
					the accompanying article describes Alex’s treatment and the Minister’s
					boasts about a new, crime-free era.

Alex heads home to see his parents, and perhaps listen
					to a little music in bed. Excitedly, he passes the Municipal painting
					downstairs—now all cleaned of graffiti—and takes the elevator up
					to his flat. When he gets inside, he finds a stranger eating with
					his parents. The stranger angrily snaps at Alex to explain himself,
					but before he can go on, Alex’s mother begins to cry, thinking he’s
					broken out illegally. Alex tells his parents his story, and learns
					that Joe, the unfamiliar man, is a lodger renting Alex’s room. Demanding
					that Joe leave, Alex brushes past them on his way to his room, which
					he finds has changed completely. All his treasured possessions,
					including his stereo, are gone. Alex’s father explains to him that,
					according to a new regulation, the police have seized everything
					to compensate Alex’s victim. In this case, the money from Alex’s
					property has gone toward the old woman’s cats. Stunned, Alex sits
					down, trying to smile to keep from getting sick, while Joe harasses
					him. He asks his father what is to be done, and when his father
					shamefacedly tells Alex that they can’t accommodate him, Alex begins
					to cry. Joe, who, despite being quite close to them in age, regards
					himself a foster son to Alex’s parents, mercilessly berates Alex
					until Alex leaves, wishing he were back in prison. 

Alex wanders aimlessly to the old record shop, as people
					on the street stare at him and his outdated clothes. At the store,
					his request to hear Mozart’s Fortieth Symphony draws some jeers
					from the store’s teenage customers, but the youngish salesclerk
					points out a listening booth for Alex to enter. Instead of Mozart’s
					Fortieth, however, the clerk pipes in the “Prague” Symphony. Normally,
					this ignorance would anger Alex. This time, however, he can’t dwell
					on his anger because the music makes him sick—he’d forgotten about
					the collateral damage done to him by Ludovico’s Technique. He runs from
					the store and staggers over to the Korova, where he orders a hallucinogenic
					milk drink.

Alex hallucinates vividly for a very long time, squealing
					euphorically, talking nonsense, seeing God and angels shaking their
					heads at him. As the drugs wear off, though, Alex’s hallucination
					sours and he entertains thoughts of killing himself. With each minute
					that passes, it becomes clearer to Alex that suicide represents
					the answer to his suffering. 

Unsure of the best way to kill himself, Alex heads over
					to the public library to research various painless, peaceful methods.
					Finding no books to his satisfaction, Alex turns to the Bible for
					comfort, as he had once done in prison. This too makes him sick,
					however, and he’s on the verge of tears when an old man inquires
					as to Alex’s troubles. While the two are talking, another old man,
					Jack, recognizes Alex. Two years ago, Alex beat Jack up and smashed
					his fake teeth, and Jack has not forgotten Alex’s face. Jack calls
					the other elderly library patrons to his side, and together they
					assail Alex, who cannot defend himself. Though the men are feeble,
					Alex begins to feel sick simply thinking about the violence being
					done to him. To his own amazement, Alex finds himself imploring
					the librarian to call the police, who arrive just as the old men
					have beaten Alex to the ground.

Once again, Alex asks himself, “What’s it going to be
					then, eh?” This time, however, there doesn’t seem to be much point
					in answering the question. Stripped of the ability to pursue the
					passions he lives for, choice has become a non-issue for Alex. Accordingly,
					Alex seems passive and listless for much of this section. Whereas
					in Part One he was an active predator, now Alex largely finds himself
					the prey to others’ ridicule. He abides the incessant staring, taunting, and
					harassment from the people he encounters, even though the subjects
					of each of these abuses—including his clothes, his taste in music,
					and his status as son—were once near and dear to his heart. The
					last of these offenses happens in Alex’s actual home, when Joe rebukes
					Alex for the suffering he has caused his parents, among others.
					Joe’s function in the plot serves mainly to satirize the facile ineptitude
					of Alex’s parents, but his unbridled attack on Alex also underlines
					Alex’s utter helplessness. Alex can’t even defend his biological
					right to be his parents’ son. 

Alex’s enforced submissiveness is part of a larger structural
					motif that Burgess employs over the course of the novel. In many
					ways, Part Three provides a mirror image of Part One. Once a victimizer, Alex
					is now the victim. Once a prince in his home, Alex is now unwanted.
					Once enamored of violence and music, Alex now despairs at the thought
					of them. Alex’s beating at the hands of the old men provides an
					apt example of this symmetry. Two years ago, Alex and his droogs
					found Jack on the nighttime streets—their turf—and humiliated him
					as they physically abused him. In this chapter, Jack confronts Alex
					in Jack’s own territory—the library—and calls in his elderly friends
					to beat and humiliate Alex. Even as Alex takes the first few punches,
					he notes the inversion of situations. Whereas he and his young friends
					used to prey on the old, here he finds “old age having a go at the
					young.” These kinds of reversals of fortune will prove a recurring
					motif throughout Part Three.

The milk-induced hallucination that leads Alex to the
					library recalls Alex’s scornful observations about the hallucinating
					Korova patron in Part One, but apart from this reversal of fortune,
					the scene also reveals Alex’s deep awareness of his own condition.
					In a commentary on his novel, Burgess has written that “the gates
					of heaven are closed to [Alex]” when he ceases to be able to enjoy
					music. Alex’s loss of divinity seems clear during his hallucination,
					when God and His angels shake their heads at Alex and refuse him
					admission to paradise. Alex’s experience at the record, which immediately precedes
					the hallucination, would seem to substantiate this interpretation.
					Drugs may take him away from the world, but they do not lift him
					higher than Beethoven or Mozart does. In fact, drugs only seem to
					exacerbate his powerlessness, as the hallucinogens engender a sense
					of “thingness” in him. As a “thing,” Alex is incapable of making
					the changes he needs in order to recover his old life. As he comes
					down from his trip, Alex realizes that he remains a “thing,” having
					lost the free will essential to his humanity. 

