On the morning before Jefferson’s execution,
					a black truck with a gray tarpaulin cover drives into town. Many
					people stop to watch it pass. It goes through the business district
					and pulls into the courthouse.

	Vivian and Grant sit at the Rainbow Club the night before
					the execution. She tells him that from noon until she knows the
					execution is over, she will have her students kneel beside their
					desks. After saying goodnight to Vivian at nine o’clock, Grant drives
					around for a while and then goes to his aunt’s house. He notices
					a couple of cars parked in front of Miss Emma’s, but he does not
					stop.

	At six-thirty the next morning, Sheriff Guidry sits down
					to breakfast, feeling nervous. He has never overseen an execution before.
					He tells his wife that he asked Grant if he would be present, but
					Grant shook his head. Guidry says Reverend Ambrose asked to attend
					the execution and Guidry said yes. He also asked the Reverend if
					one more person from the quarter would like to attend. At eight,
					Guidry goes to the courthouse and supervises the unloading process.
					Henry Vincent, the official executioner, tells the sheriff that the
					prisoner must be shaven. Guidry asks Paul to do it, and Paul reluctantly
					agrees.

	Jefferson remains quiet as Paul shaves his head, ankles,
					and wrists. As Paul leaves, Jefferson asks him to deliver the notebook
					to Grant and to keep the radio for himself. Paul says he cannot
					keep the radio, but he promises to give it to the other inmates.
					He accepts Jefferson’s gift of a marble. Jefferson asks Paul if
					he plans to attend the execution and Paul says yes.

As the hour of Jefferson’s execution approaches, Grant
					steps outside the schoolhouse. He remembers old friends, classmates,
					and baseball teammates. Many of his friends have died, mostly as
					a result of violence. Grant stifles tears for Jefferson, saying
					that there will be too many more like him, and he cannot cry for
					all of them. He thinks of calling Vivian or the Reverend. He thinks
					Reverend Ambrose is courageous for using the white man’s God as
					a source of strength. Grant wonders if he has caused Jefferson to
					lose faith in God and asks Jefferson to forgive his foolishness
					if he has robbed him of faith. Grant says he puts his faith in Jefferson.

	At ten minutes before noon, Grant lines up his students
					and asks them to kneel. He goes back outside. He wonders what Jefferson
					is doing at this very minute and asks himself why he is not with
					Jefferson, or inside praying with his students. Angry, Grant says
					that he refuses to believe in the same God worshipped by the jurors
					that convicted Jefferson. Tante Lou, Miss Emma, and Reverend Ambrose
					believe in God because it frees their minds and gives their bodies
					a chance to be free. Grant says he knows this because “he knows
					what it means to be a slave. I am a slave.”

	At last, Paul’s car approaches the church. Paul parks
					his car nearby and brings Jefferson’s notebook to Grant. Paul says
					that as Jefferson walked toward the electric chair he exuded more
					strength than any man in the room. He tells Grant he considers him
					a wonderful teacher for helping Jefferson, but Grant says that he
					did very little and that maybe Jefferson caused the change. Or,
					he says sarcastically, maybe God changed Jefferson. Paul offers
					Grant his hand and asks to be his friend. Grant takes the hand.
					When Grant goes back to his students, he faces them and cries.

Like the first chapter in the novel, Chapter 30 relates
					information from an undisclosed perspective, blurring our conception
					of reality. The chapter follows the thoughts and actions of characters
					besides Grant, indicating that either Grant uses his imagination
					in writing these sections or that Gaines temporarily uses an omniscient
					narrator to show us different perspectives. This shift in perspective enables
					Gaines to present his detailed account of Grant’s individual story
					in the context of a greater story—the plight of his community, and
					even the plight of the white people in the town. The final chapters
					focus more and more on Grant’s connection to other people. In particular,
					while standing outside the schoolhouse, Grant shows his connection
					with numerous people, both from his past and from his present. His
					heart yearns for Reverend Ambrose, Vivian, his baseball buddies,
					and Jefferson. The novel ends with Grant’s noticeable connection
					with the white deputy, Paul. Moreover, the connection of Paul’s
					and Grant’s hands and Grant’s subsequent weeping in the schoolhouse
					recall specific moments in Jefferson’s development during Grant’s
					visits. Gaines has already shown the pressing of hands between Jefferson
					and Grant and the weeping that followed Grant’s eloquent speech.
					Here, he gives the impression that Grant too is a humble hero, connected
					with humanity. Finally, Grant’s crying in front of his students
					shows that he is finally ready to connect with the children with
					whom his has been so strict throughout the novel. He is ready to
					be a leader because he is ready to be vulnerable.

Before dying, Jefferson completes his transformation into
					a dignified, compassionate, exemplary human being. When Paul enters the
					cell to shave Jefferson, he notices that Jefferson stands up immediately
					and that the radio has been turned off. Before, Jefferson’s bunk
					and his radio allowed him to isolate himself. He used to lie on the
					bed and listen to the radio in order to block out the world. In leaving
					these props behind, Jefferson shows that he wishes to face reality.
					Of all the people involved in the execution, only Jefferson faces
					the event unflinchingly. He becomes even more strongly identified
					with Christ in these last chapters. He seems to convert Paul, who
					says Jefferson was the “strongest man in the room.” Grant addresses
					his thoughts to Jefferson in the final chapter as if praying to
					Jesus Christ for forgiveness or assistance. Grant asks Jefferson
					to forgive him and says, “My faith is in you, Jefferson.” For Grant,
					Jefferson has become a hero to emulate in times of despair.

Gaines does not impose a tidy transformation on Grant,
					who persists with his sarcasm, fear, and self-loathing until the
					last page of the novel. Although he despises himself for it, he
					cannot muster up the courage to attend the execution, and he cannot
					muster up the humility to kneel and pray with his students. He refuses
					to cry for Jefferson, asking himself if he wants to start weeping
					for all of the persecuted black men and women in the world. When
					Paul visits and makes heartrending overtures of sorrow and friendship,
					Grant hardly answers him. He expresses outrage at the whites’ God,
					and he provokes Paul’s disapproval by saying sarcastically that
					perhaps God helped Jefferson. 

Still, much in Grant has changed. He risked emotional
					pain by reaching out to Jefferson. He begs Jefferson’s forgiveness
					for possibly allowing him to lose faith in God. He grudgingly accepts
					Paul’s overtures, agreeing to shake the proffered hand. He gives
					Jefferson credit for becoming strong and good. He cries at the end
					of the novel, allowing himself to weep for Jefferson even if it
					might mean he has to start weeping for all black people, and allowing
					himself to feel the emotion he has repressed throughout the novel.

