[A]ll the bitterness of life seemed to
					be served to her on her plate. . . .

During her honeymoon in Tostes, Emma feels disappointed
					not to be in a romantic chalet in Switzerland. She finds her husband
					dull and uninspiring and begins to resent his lack of interest in
					a more passionate life. Charles continues to love Emma. His mother
					visits and hates Emma for having won his love. After she leaves,
					Emma tries to love Charles, but disappointment lingers. She wonders
					why she ever got married. Then, one of Charles’s patients, the Marquis d’Andervilliers,
					invites the Bovarys to a ball at his mansion.

Although enchanted by the atmosphere of wealth and luxury
					at the ball, Emma is embarrassed by her husband, whom she views
					as a clumsy, unsophisticated oaf. She is surrounded by wealthy,
					elegant noblemen and women, among them an old man who was one of Marie
					Antoinette’s lovers. When the ballroom gets too hot, a servant breaks
					the windows to let in the air. Emma looks outside and sees peasants
					gawking in; she is reminded of her life on the farm, which now feels
					a world away. A viscount dances with her, and she feels as though
					she has been cheated out of the life for which she was born. On
					the way home, the same viscount passes them on the road and drops
					a cigar box, which Emma keeps. Back in Tostes, Emma is angry with
					everyone around her.

Fixated on her cigar case and her fashionable ladies’
					magazines, Emma sinks into fantasies of high society life in Paris,
					growing despondent and miserable and venting her self-pity by acting
					sullen and capricious with her husband. Although Charles’s business
					prospers, Emma grows increasingly irritated with his poor manners
					and dullness. As her restlessness, boredom, and depression intensify,
					she becomes physically ill. In an effort to cure her, Charles decides
					that they should move to Yonville, a town in need of a doctor. Before
					the move, Emma learns that she is pregnant. While packing, she throws her
					dried bridal bouquet into the fire and watches it burn.

Now that we see the world of the novel fully from Emma’s
					perspective, Flaubert begins to develop the basic conflict inherent
					in her situation: Emma is unable to accept the world as it is, but
					she cannot make the world as she wants it to be. Now that she is
					married to a middle-class dullard, she cannot accept her lot. She
					steeps herself in fantasy, and the pressure of her constant rebellion
					against reality makes her restless, moody, and eventually physically
					ill.

	Flaubert’s portrayal of the ball and the events that
					follow displays the ironic contrast between Emma’s experience and
					reality. Flaubert conveys both the external reality of how Emma
					looks at the ball as well the psychological reality of how the ball
					looks to Emma. She is so happy that she fails to realize that no
					one at the ball is paying any attention to her, and her meaningless
					dance with the viscount becomes, in her fancy, a tremendous romantic
					occurrence. In fact, she continues to overlook the well-meaning
					love of her good-natured but vapid husband in favor of her memories
					of the ball for weeks after everyone else has already forgotten
					it. When Charles decides to move to Yonville in an attempt to salvage
					Emma’s failing health, she takes a moment from her packing to throw
					her bridal wreath dramatically onto the fire. The event symbolizes
					her rejection of the marriage and the complacent middle-class world
					that have, to her mind, imprisoned her.

	Emma’s prejudiced eyes intensify Flaubert’s realist attention
					to detail. In particular, the details of Charles’s oafishness are
					greatly magnified. The narrator describes every noise he makes when
					he eats. Flaubert also devotes several paragraphs to a description
					of Emma’s overwhelmingly boring daily routine. Emma’s boredom becomes
					one of the novel’s subjects and a means of developing her character.
					Flaubert’s focus on boredom marks another of the novel’s departures
					from romanticism toward a realistic mode.

	Emma’s relation to her farming roots is also explored
					in this section. Flaubert places a recollection of the past in the
					middle of Emma’s fantasy evening to show that she can never really
					escape her origins. At the ball, Emma allows herself to forget that
					she is not a privileged member of the upper-class world she is visiting,
					but when a servant breaks a windowpane, Emma sees the peasants outside, and
					she remembers the simple country life of her youth.

