The title character and hero of Johnny Tremain is
				a fourteen-year old boy living in colonial Boston. When we first
				meet Johnny, he is arrogant, ambitious, slightly cruel, and wholly
				self-centered. In part, these vicious character traits stem from
				his prodigious gifts: he is unusually bright and well educated for
				an apprentice, and he is widely considered the most talented young
				silversmith in Boston. His insecurity and cruelty may also stem
				from his lack of a loving family, as his parents died when he was
				very young. Johnny works as an apprentice in a silversmith’s house,
				learning the craft in the hope that one day he can open his own
				shop. As an apprentice in his master’s house, Johnny has a status
				only a little above a servant, but he acts as tyrant, ordering around
				not only the other two apprentices but even his master and his master’s
				four granddaughters.

	Johnny’s disdainful treatment of others leads to resentment,
				and this resentment leads to a disfiguring accident that ruins Johnny’s future
				as a silversmith. With a crippled hand, Johnny cannot find skilled
				work, and he allows himself to feel self-pity and despair. Dangerously
				close to giving up all hope of an honest life, Johnny almost turns
				to crime. Yet, due to his new job with the Boston Observer, the
				Whig newspaper, and his friendship with Rab Silsbee, the Lornes,
				and the leaders of the revolution, Johnny takes a more honest path.
				Inspired by their idealism and self-sacrifice, Johnny finds himself
				transforming from a selfish boy into a patriotic man. On a conscious
				level, he models himself after his new best friend, Rab, trying
				to imitate the older boy’s quiet, unassuming confidence and mild
				temperament. Unconsciously, as Johnny devours books in the Lornes’
				library and soaks in the rhetoric of such acquaintances as Samuel
				Adams and James Otis, he begins to care about something much larger
				than his own petty ambitions and comforts. Johnny suddenly becomes
				an ardent Whig and a soldier, not because he is part of the Lorne
				family but because he rationally believes in freedom and rights
				for the colonists. At the novel’s end, Johnny has finally overcome
				his psychological and emotional handicaps. Faced unexpectedly with
				the prospect of a restored hand, Johnny is less concerned about
				whether he will be able to resume his job as a silversmith than
				whether he will be able to fire a gun and serve his nascent country.

