Edna Pontellier is a respectable woman of the late 1800s
who not only acknowledges her sexual desires, but also has the strength
and courage to act on them. Breaking through the role appointed
to her by society, she discovers her own identity independent of
her husband and children. Many of Kate Chopin’s other stories feature
passionate, unconventional female protagonists, but none presents
a heroine as openly rebellious as Edna. The details and specifics
of Edna’s character are key to understanding the novel and its impact on
generations of readers.

At the beginning of the novel, Edna exists in a sort of
semi-conscious state. She is comfortable in her marriage to Léonce
and unaware of her own feelings and ambitions. Edna has always been
a romantic, enamored with a cavalry officer at a very young age,
in love with a man visiting a neighboring plantation in her teens,
and infatuated with a tragedian as a young woman. But she saw her
marriage to Léonce as the end to her life of passion and the beginning
of a life of responsibility. Although she expected her dreams of romance
to disappear along with her youth, her fantasies and yearnings only
remain latent, re-emerging on Grand Isle in the form of her passion
for Robert Lebrun.

The people Edna meets and the experiences she
has on Grand Isle awaken desires and urges for music, sexual satisfaction,
art, and freedom that she can no longer bear to keep hidden. Like
a child, Edna begins to see the world around her with a fresh perspective,
forgetting the behavior expected of her and ignoring the effects
of her unconventional actions. Yet Edna is often childish as well
as childlike: she harbors unrealistic dreams about the possibilities
of a wild adulterous romance without consequences, and she fails
to consider the needs and desires of anyone but herself. Her
flagrant disregard of reality is revealed when she mocks Robert’s
apprehensions about adultery, and when she leaves her
children in the care of their grandmother without a second thought.
Edna’s independence frequently amounts to selfishness.

Yet although the text never presents Edna’s escape from
tradition as heroic, it also never declares her actions shameful.
The narrative may sometimes portray Edna as selfish in the ways
she acts out her defiance of convention, but it never portrays Edna’s
defiance itself as intrinsically wrong. Perhaps, even, the novel
portrays Edna’s rebellion as intrinsically right. Given the book’s
ambiguity, Edna’s decision to commit suicide at the end of the novel
can be read either as an act of cowardice—of submission to thoughts
of her sons’ reputations and to a sense that life has become too
difficult—or as an act of final rebellion—of refusal to sacrifice
her integrity by putting her life in the hands of controlling powers.

Take the Analysis of Major Characters Quick Quiz 

