Jodie, Kya’s older brother, is a good-hearted, level-headed boy who did what he could to protect and care for his mother and siblings despite their difficult circumstances. Jodie was the most important family member in Kya’s life – not only did he show her affection and take the blows from their father to save Kya from the same fate, he also was the only member of her family to come back for her in adulthood. This is an incredibly meaningful gesture for Kya, who believes that no one in her family ever cared enough to return to save her.

Jodie is forced to leave Kya with Pa after suffering severe physical abuse. He’s hesitant to leave Kya behind, but he’s a young boy dealing with a situation beyond his capacity, and he knows he will not survive Pa’s incessant violence. It’s later revealed that Jodie did well for himself after leaving – he joined the army, which paid for a mechanical engineering degree at Georgia Tech. His young adulthood was not without suffering, though. His commitment to the army brought him to Vietnam, where he served two tours. Jodie is also wracked with guilt for abandoning Kya, telling her: “I’ve ached, felt terrible about it for years. I was a coward, a stupid coward. These damned medals don’t mean a thing.” Kya forgives him for everything, acknowledging that he was just a child himself, and noting that his eyes are still the same, suggesting that he remained the loving Jodie she knew in her youth.

Jodie was also close friends with Tate Walker as a boy, and he encourages Kya to rekindle a relationship with him. In many ways, Jodie and Tate serve similar character roles in Where the Crawdads Sing. Their friendship suggests that they have the same values and morals: they’re both gentle, caring men who stand in stark contrast to male antagonists like Chase and Pa. While Jodie and Tate both needed to build their own lives away from Kya, they prove themselves eventually, showing Kya that those who truly love you will return to you. When Jodie returns to Kya, he fully reintegrates himself into her life. He brings her precious family memories and important news of their mother, and he is open and honest about the trials of their past and present situations. When Kya is accused of Chase’s murder, Jodie stands by her during the trial, even though Kya is too ashamed to contact him herself for support. And when Kya’s trial threatens to turn her against love and community forever, Jodie is there to be a voice of reason and love. He tells her, “Don’t let this horrible thing drive you further from people.” She heeds his advice, letting him and Tate fully back into her life, and Jodie remains a devoted brother until her death.

