Twelve years have passed since Fantine has been to her
					hometown of Montreuil-sur-mer, and she is surprised at how much
					the town has grown and modernized during the past decade. The changes
					are largely due to Monsieur Madeleine, a stranger about whom little
					is known. The narrator says that Madeleine arrived in Montreuil
					in 1815 with a newer, cheaper method for
					producing black beads, the town’s largest industry. A manufacturing
					revolution ensued, and Madeleine’s cunning and philanthropy so impressed
					the king that he made Madeleine the mayor of Montreuil in 1820.
					No one knows much about Madeleine’s past, but he has been wildly
					popular since the day he saved two local children from a fire. The
					townspeople do not, therefore, comment on Madeleine’s quirks and
					foibles, such as his wearing of a black hatband after the death
					of the bishop Myriel.

Only Javert, the town’s police inspector, suspects that
					Madeleine may be harboring a dark secret. Javert suspects that Madeleine
					is actually Jean Valjean, an extraordinarily strong convict whom
					Javert once guarded. Javert’s suspicions are heightened when he
					witnesses Madeleine rescue a man, Fauchelevent, by lifting him from underneath
					a fallen carriage. Though Madeleine is aware of Javert’s suspicions,
					he does not appear to feel threatened by them.

Fantine finds employment in Madeleine’s factory, but
					her secretive manner makes her coworkers suspicious. The illiterate
					Fantine writes letters to the Thénardiers by dictating to a scribe
					who turns out to be a gossip and who tells the factory workers that
					Fantine is hiding an illegitimate child. Fantine is subsequently
					fired from her job on charges of immorality. She owes many people
					money, and although she tries to live on as little as she can, the
					Thénardiers continue to raise their price for taking care of Cosette.
					To satisfy their demands, Fantine first sells her hair, then her
					front teeth, and finally, becomes a prostitute. Nonetheless, Thénardier
					threatens to kick Cosette out if Fantine does not pay him one hundred
					francs.

One night, a man harasses Fantine as she waits for potential
					clients outside a bar. The man hits Fantine with a snowball, and
					she snaps and attacks him. Javert arrests Fantine and threatens
					her with six months in jail, ignoring her pleas that he think of
					her child and show mercy. Madeleine intervenes, freeing Fantine
					and promising to take care of her and Cosette. Fantine, who blames
					Madeleine for firing her, spits in his face. Madeleine does not
					flinch and repeats his offer of help. Fantine is so overwhelmed
					by Madeleine’s kindness that she faints. Javert is outraged that
					Madeleine has overruled his decision and decides to investigate
					Madeleine’s past.

Hugo’s focus on Montreuil-sur-mer’s new prosperity shows
					his enthusiasm for the Industrial Revolution. He depicts the Industrial Revolution
					as nothing short of miraculous, a time when a few simple changes
					in manufacturing technique can rejuvenate an entire region. By having
					Madeleine revolutionize a traditional industry, Hugo preemptively
					counters the argument that industrial development comes at the expense
					of tradition. He links Madeleine’s prosperity with his philanthropy
					and the success of his factories. Hugo believes that technology
					levels the playing field, creating a world where what is good for
					one is good for all, where even a passing stranger can make a fortune.
					Madeleine seems to be a man with no past and no connections, but
					this apparent lack of background makes no difference in the world
					of the Industrial Revolution. Unlike the characters in class-conscious
					Paris and Digne, Madeleine prospers and thrives by using his brains.

In his enthusiasm for the Industrial Revolution, Hugo
					reverses his usual perspective by focusing on a hero, Madeleine,
					who is a prosperous man. Hugo continues to champion the rights of
					the poor and oppressed, but in Book Five the workers are responsible
					for bringing most of their misery upon one another. Fantine’s misfortunes
					and descent into prostitution are caused by the nosiness of her fellow
					workers—not, as she suspects, by any cruelty on Madeleine’s part.
					Hugo still criticizes the upper classes—the man whom Fantine assaults
					is a bourgeois dandy—but he makes the hero of these chapters the
					town’s wealthiest man. In contrast to other novels set during the
					Industrial Revolution, in which factory bosses are often portrayed
					as brutal, heartless, and greedy, in Les Misérables it
					is the boss who helps the poor escape the injustices of outdated
					social hierarchies. While this sympathetic portrayal of the wealthy
					industrialist does not contradict the message of Hugo’s earlier
					chapters, it is a surprise from an author whose sympathies are usually
					with the poor.

Hugo uses foreshadowing in these chapters, dropping multiple hints
					that Madeleine is in fact Jean Valjean. He helps us interpret these
					clues through Javert’s unwavering eyes. The narrator notes, for
					example, that no one thinks to ask Madeleine for his passport because
					his rescue of two children has made him an unquestioned hero. The
					narrator also casually mentions that Madeleine wears a black armband
					upon hearing of Myriel’s death, which we know is something Valjean
					might do since Myriel is so important to him. In case we miss some
					of these hints about Valjean’s true nature, Hugo provides Javert’s
					investigative eye to interpret them for us. Though we might not,
					for instance, understand the significance of Madeleine’s rescue
					of Fauchelevent, Javert immediately notes this act as a sign that
					Madeleine possesses Valjean’s unusual strength. These clues make
					us fairly sure that Madeleine is indeed Valjean. However, like Javert,
					we do not have proof, and we begin to anticipate the climactic moment
					when our suspicions will be confirmed.

