There is a new man at breakfast, and James recognizes
					him. He is Matty Jackson, former Featherweight Champion of the World,
					and he is at the clinic because he is a crack addict. James, Leonard, Matty,
					Ed, and Ted sit together during breakfast and at a clinic lecture.
					After the lecture James goes to see Joanne and tells her he’s decided
					to try to get sober. He says that seeing the Bald Man cry made him
					realize what true bravery is.

Ken calls James into his office to ask if he’s given any
					more thought to doing whatever it takes to get sober. Despite what
					he just said to Joanne, James doesn’t have an answer to this question.
					He is still uncertain that he will be successful. Ken gives James
					an AA workbook (which looks like a coloring book) and instructs
					him to write down a goal on the “goal board” in the unit. He also
					tells James that Warren and John are leaving and that he will be
					moving into a two-person room. James says his good-byes to Warren
					and John. John asks James to look up his estranged daughter and
					tell her that he really tried this time. James walks outside, trying
					to fight the Fury. When it hits him he attacks a small tree and
					rips it to shreds. Lilly comes, stops him, and holds him while he
					cries. James’s new roommate is Miles Davis, an older black man,
					a clarinet player, and a judge in New Orleans. Miles, James, Matty,
					Ed, Ted, and Leonard have lunch together. At lecture James looks
					for Lilly and is struck by how he feels when he sees her.

Back in their room, Miles plays the clarinet while James
					reads the Tao Te Ching, and James eventually falls
					asleep. James wakes up to screaming. It’s Roy, who’s back, claiming
					his name is Jack, beating the couch in the lounge with a stick and
					threatening to kill anyone who comes near him. After he’s sedated,
					James can’t go back to sleep. He makes coffee while the other men
					gossip about what happened to Roy. The other men go back to sleep,
					and James thinks about the girl in his past. He was so struck by
					her that he could only stare at her until she asked him why he stared.
					He told her that she was so beautiful that he knew he was falling
					for her.

James goes outside and sits on a bench at the lake. He
					is joined by Leonard, who tells him that he is at the facility because
					his mentor, Mikey the Nose, got clean after years of using and asked
					Leonard to do the same. Unfortunately, shortly after making this
					request, Mikey was killed in a drive-by shooting. Leonard says that
					Mikey’s last piece of advice to him was to hold on. At lunch, James
					bumps into Lilly and she passes him a note that requests an afternoon
					meeting. James goes to the goal board and writes that he wants to
					be a Laker Girl. He fills out the AA workbook by writing one word
					on each page. He brings the book back to Ken’s office and goes to
					his room to read the Tao again. At a unit meeting
					with Lincoln, Lincoln tells the men that Roy has multiple-personality
					disorder. Lincoln and James go to a meeting in Joanne’s office,
					where she confronts James about the coloring book and his goal and
					urges him to take the Twelve Step program more seriously. James
					reveals that he doesn’t want safety. He wants a test of his will
					to be sober.

James goes to the woods to meet Lilly and waits. He falls
					asleep until she wakes him and asks if he has a girlfriend. He tells
					her about the girl from the past. Lilly tells James that she is
					at the facility because of her grandmother. She asks him to tell
					her about his girlfriend, but he says it’s too painful. She tells
					him to tell her about losing his virginity. He tells her a story
					about lying to his parents about having a date to the homecoming
					dance, and how he pretended he was going to the dance, when in fact
					he was out finding a hooker so he could lose his virginity. Lilly
					holds him and kisses him good-bye. Later she calls him to tell him
					she misses him. James walks to his room. He stops outside and listens
					to Miles playing. He falls asleep thinking of the Tao.

James has obviously turned a corner. He has a steady group
					of people that he sits with at every single meal, whereas he previously
					ate alone and ate purely to “fill” himself, filling the emptiness
					that he feels lurking within him. Now, he refers to his mealtime
					companions as “friends” and experiences a level of contentedness
					that he doesn’t seem to remember previous to this. There is much
					laughing and joking at their table during lunch. James is finding
					that the laughter fills him in a way that blindly stuffing himself
					with food, or taking drugs, couldn’t. He notes that it feels good
					to laugh, an indication that he hasn’t done it in so long that he’s
					forgotten what it feels like.

James is also finding other ways to deal with his situation. Although
					he still feels helpless at times, he’s finding that concentrating
					on the things that make him feel good—staring at Lilly, laughing,
					listening to Miles play his clarinet, or even just reading the Tao—help
					each day go by a little easier. He makes it a point to actively
					seek out Joanne and let her know that he is intent on trying to
					remain sober. During his conversation with Joanne, James is much
					more amenable to trying her suggestions—“Try it. Be vulnerable,”
					she tells him—than in previous conversations. James also discovers
					a maturity level in himself that previously didn’t exist and helps
					him to cope. Here he is filled with enough confidence and compassion
					to impart some wisdom to John, who is terrified of leaving. James
					sits on the bed with him and holds his hand and hugs him. In front
					of him James sees a boy, not a man. And yet, when John cries, James
					tells him that he sees a level of strength and bravery in the very ability
					to cry and release his feelings.

James and John again serve as foils to each other later,
					in the woods, when James finds a tree to destroy. As Lilly is comforting him,
					James begins to realize that what he’s been destroying all these years
					is not other people’s lives, but his own existence. Like John, he also
					sees in himself a fragile boy, and he lets himself weep and cry
					in front of Lilly, who evokes in him all of the vulnerability he’s
					been afraid to outwardly show. When James meets Miles for the first time,
					he notes that Miles is “immediately a friend,” which he sees as being
					odd, given that James doesn’t get along well with judges and other
					authority figures. Perhaps this is more an indication of James’s growing
					willingness to be vulnerable enough to let people be friends right
					off the bat, instead of being instantly wary of them. Roy reappears
					in the facility at a remarkably opportune time for James’s growth.
					There is a mild feeling of detached redemption in James as he watches
					Roy screaming—Roy is far worse off than James ever will be—but there
					is also a sense of sad awareness, that each one of the men in the
					unit might possibly become Roy, crazed and wielding a stick and
					threatening to kill.

Lilly’s involvement in James’s life occurs at about the
					same time that the reader is learning more about the girl James
					met in college. This timing places Lilly head to head with the girl
					from the past. They both have blue eyes, but James notes that Lilly’s
					eyes are like water, whereas the other girl’s eyes are like the
					Arctic. We still don’t know the other girl’s name. Lilly’s having
					a name makes her more real, more touchable. Also, as James describes
					the scars on her forearms and the plastic watch that she wears and
					the fact that her clothes hang far too big on her, we are able to
					create a very real picture of Lilly, whereas we only have vague
					impressions and emotions about the girl at school. In fact, James’s
					reactions to the two girls are nearly at opposite ends of the spectrum.
					Whereas the Girl with the Arctic Eyes makes James completely forget
					about the rest of the world, Lilly’s presence in his life is nothing
					but sheer reality. In some ways, James has neatly exchanged his
					drugs of choice for Lilly. She, in essence, is another addiction.

James’s reluctance to accept the Twelve Step program is
					further underscored by his discovery of the Tao.
					He is more interested in these simple directions on how to live
					a normal life than he is in directions on how to live life as a
					recovering addict and alcoholic. Leonard’s lesson to “hold on” appeals
					to James in exactly this same vein. The concept of tightly focusing
					in on such a simple detail is very attractive to James, who is frenetic
					and constantly moving. Both the Tao and Leonard’s
					advice help him to focus on simply getting better. Although James
					is still rebelling in small ways (he writes across the coloring
					book that he doesn’t need the book to know he’s out of control),
					his rebellions are less about fighting life and more about fighting
					for the way he wants to live. It’s a small difference, but significant.

