A government official with little personality of his own,
				Karenin maintains the façade of a cultivated and rational man. He
				keeps up with contemporary poetry, reads books on Roman history
				for leisure, and makes appearances at all the right parties.
				He is civil to everyone and makes no waves. But he remains a bland
				bureaucrat whose personality has disappeared under years of devotion
				to his duties. Though he reads poetry, he rarely has a poetic thought;
				he reads history but never reflects on it meaningfully. He does not
				enjoy himself or spark conversations at parties but merely makes himself
				seen and then leaves. Karenin’s entire existence consists of professional
				obligations, with little room for personal whim or passion. When first made
				aware of Anna’s liaison with Vronsky, Karenin briefly entertains thoughts
				of challenging Vronsky to a duel but quickly abandons the idea when he
				imagines a pistol pointed his direction. This cowardice indicates his
				general resistance to a life of fervent emotion and grand passions.

Karenin’s limp dispassion colors his home life and serves
				as the backdrop to Anna’s rebellious search for love at any price.
				He viewed his betrothal to Anna, for instance, as an act of
				duty like everything else in his life: it was time to marry,
				so he chose an appropriate girl, who happened to be Anna. He never
				gives any indications of appreciating Anna’s uniqueness or valuing
				the ways in which she differs from other women. His appreciation
				of her is only for her role as wife and mother. Similarly, Karenin’s
				fatherly interaction with Seryozha is cold and official, focused
				on educational progress and never on Seryozha’s perceptions or emotions.
				Karenin wishes to raise a responsible child, as he surely was himself.
				It is Karenin’s obedience to duty, his pigeonholing of all persons
				and experiences as either appropriate or inappropriate, that Anna
				rejects. When Anna leaves, she does not simply dump Karenin the
				man but also the conventionalism that Karenin believes in and represents.
				Karenin’s slide into occultism and stagnation at the end of the
				novel suggests indirectly how much he needed Anna, and how much
				she was the life behind his façade.

