The number of readers who have been able to identify with
Holden and make him their hero is truly staggering. Something about
his discontent, and his vivid way of expressing it, makes him resonate powerfully
with readers who come from backgrounds completely different from
his. It is tempting to inhabit his point of view and revel in his
cantankerousness rather than try to deduce what is wrong with him.
The obvious signs that Holden is a troubled and unreliable narrator
are manifold: he fails out of four schools; he manifests complete
apathy toward his future; he is hospitalized, and visited by a psychoanalyst,
for an unspecified complaint; and he is unable to connect with other
people. We know of two traumas in his past that clearly have something
to do with his emotional state: the death of his brother Allie and
the suicide of one of his schoolmates. But, even with that knowledge,
Holden’s peculiarities cannot simply be explained away as symptoms
of a readily identifiable disorder.

The most noticeable of Holden’s “peculiarities” is how extremely
judgmental he is of almost everything and everybody. He criticizes
and philosophizes about people who are boring, people who are insecure,
and, above all, people who are “phony.” Holden carries this penchant
for passing judgment to such an extreme that it often becomes extremely
funny, such as when he speculates that people are so crass that
someone will probably write “fuck you” on his tombstone. Holden
applies the term “phony” not to people who are insincere but to
those who are too conventional or too typical—for instance, teachers
who “act like” teachers by assuming a different demeanor in class
than they do in conversation, or people who dress and act like the
other members of their social class. While Holden uses the label
“phony” to imply that such people are superficial, his use of the
term actually indicates that his own perceptions of other people
are superficial. In almost every case, he rejects more complex judgments
in favor of simple categorical ones.

A second facet of Holden’s personality that deserves
comment is his attitude toward sex. Holden is a virgin, but he is
very interested in sex, and, in fact, he spends much of the novel
trying to lose his virginity. He feels strongly that sex should
happen between people who care deeply about and respect one another,
and he is upset by the realization that sex can be casual. Stradlater’s
date with Jane doesn’t just make him jealous; it infuriates him
to think of a girl he knows well having sex with a boy she doesn’t
know well. Moreover, he is disturbed by the fact that he is aroused
by women whom he doesn’t respect or care for, like the blonde tourist
he dances with in the Lavender Room, or like Sally Hayes, whom he
refers to as “stupid” even as he arranges a date with her. Finally,
he is disturbed by the fact that he is aroused by kinky sexual behavior—particularly
behavior that isn’t respectful of one’s sex partner, such as spitting
in one’s partner’s face. Although Holden refers to such behavior
as “crumby,” he admits that it is pretty fun, although he doesn’t
think that it should be.

A brief note about Holden’s name: a “caul” is a membrane
that covers the head of a fetus during birth. Thus, the caul in
his name may symbolize the blindness of childhood or the inability
of the child to see the complexity of the adult world. Holden’s
full name might be read as Hold-on Caul-field: he wants to hold
on to what he sees as his innocence, which is really his blindness.

Take the Analysis of Major Characters Quick Quiz

