Although The Chosen focuses equally on
				both Reuven’s and Danny’s personal and religious development, it
				is Danny’s story that provides the central conflict of the novel
				and sets in motion both protagonists’ process of discovery. Danny
				and Reuven’s similarities—their love of learning, quick minds, and
				deep Jewish faith—allow them to relate to one another and become
				friends. At the same time, their differences in family situations,
				culture, and relationships to the non-Jewish secular world allow
				them to learn from one another. Throughout the novel, Danny learns
				restraint and introspection from Reuven. As Reb Saunders points
				out in the final chapter, Reuven entered Danny’s life when Danny
				“was ready to rebel.” Reb Saunders argues that God sent Reuven to
				Danny to help him.	

At the beginning of the novel, Danny is tense and unsure
				about how to deal with his inner desire to rebel against his upbringing.
				He has difficulty speaking openly, and only after warming up to
				Reuven does he reveal the awkwardness of his situation. Furthermore, Danny’s
				repressed anger toward his father has made him highly susceptible
				to embracing any criticism of Hasidism. In Chapter 8, Danny
				reads Graetz’s History of the Jews. The book contains
				a harsh denunciation of the Hasidim, but Danny reads it with a surprising
				lack of skepticism. Reuven, on the other hand, provides a tempering,
				rational perspective, balancing Danny’s anger and frustration with
				compassion and contemplation. By the end of the novel, Danny has
				resolved his conflict with his father; furthermore, like Reuven,
				he has developed a broadened, more balanced sense of himself and
				the world around him.

	Sanford Sternlicht writes that the conflict between Danny
				and his father should be seen in terms of Freud’s theory of the
				Oedipus complex, which posits that a son holds an unconscious wish
				to take his father’s place and be the sole object of his mother’s
				affection. Sternlicht argues that Danny expresses his hostility
				toward his father as aversion to the idea of taking his father’s
				place as leader of the congregation. Sternlicht adds, “Most significantly,
				it is Danny’s reading of Freud that provides much of the ammunition
				for his successful revolt against and defeat of his father, who,
				unconsciously, may be trying to deprive Danny of his individual
				manhood by turning him into a clone of himself.” Yet Danny’s rebellion
				is against his culture as well as his father. He has a repressed
				need to rebel against the traditional, constrictive role of a tzaddik—and
				the type of life that Danny fears his father wants him to lead.

