Good by mr wigin tell them im strong
						tell them im a man	

This chapter consists of Jefferson’s diary. Jefferson
					has never received much formal education, and misspellings fill
					the diary. Some of the time, he addresses his writing to Grant,
					as if writing a letter. Jefferson writes about the other men in
					prison and wonders why poor people seem to suffer so much more than
					the rich do. He concludes that the Lord caters to white people.
					A few days later, Jefferson writes about Grant’s assertion that
					he is better than white people think. Jefferson wants proof of his
					worth. He says he has never done so much thinking in his life, and
					he begins to realize how little he has always expected of himself.

	The Monday before Jefferson’s execution, he writes that
					the sheriff, Mr. Pichot, and Mr. Morgan visit him in his cell. Jefferson hears
					Mr. Morgan and Sheriff Guidry talking about their bet. Mr. Morgan
					wants to double the stakes. He bets that Grant will fail. Mr. Pichot
					asks Jefferson how he is doing and then offers to sharpen his pencil
					with his own knife. Then, with Guidry’s permission, Pichot gives
					Jefferson the knife. Jefferson says he will give it back in a few days.
					During the next few days, people from all over town come to speak
					to Jefferson. His friend Bok reluctantly gives Jefferson one of his
					marbles, and Jefferson cries because no one has ever paid so much
					attention to him.

	Vivian comes with Grant to visit Jefferson on his last
					night. Jefferson is humiliated in front of her, for he has not bathed
					recently and thinks he is ugly, but Vivian tells him he looks handsome
					and strong. She kisses his face. Jefferson apologizes to Grant for
					crying when Grant told him he would not be at the execution. He
					explains that he cried because nobody was ever as good to him as
					Grant is— nobody but Grant made him feel he is somebody. 

	Guidry asks what Jefferson wants for supper and Jefferson
					asks for his godmother’s cooking and a little ice cream for dessert.
					After Jefferson has dinner and a shower, Guidry asks him if he feels
					he was treated well. Jefferson says he does, and Guidry says he
					should write that in his tablet. Guidry offers to leave the light
					on so that he can continue to write. Jefferson cannot sleep and
					writes in his journal. He resolves to see the sunrise on his last
					morning. He says he cannot listen to the radio because it plays
					only for the living. Jefferson is afraid, but determined to stay
					strong. He writes goodbye to Mr. Wiggins and asks him to “tell them
					im a man.” He says he will give the diary to Paul to deliver to
					Grant.

Jefferson’s diary testifies to the mutual benefits he
					and Grant get from their friendship and love for one another. Grant
					bought the diary for Jefferson, and Jefferson writes in it usually
					as if writing a letter to Grant. Even when he is alone in his cell,
					Jefferson can write to Grant and feel he has companionship. As Jefferson
					writes down his thoughts, he begins to think seriously about the
					world and his role in it. Showing the influence of Grant’s words,
					Jefferson writes that he realizes how important he has become to
					his community. Moreover, the diary will serve as a boon
					for Grant’s self-confidence and his sense of self-worth, as he himself
					initiated the use of the diary by engaging Jefferson and buying
					him the notebook and pencil.

	The white characters are not uniformly cruel
					to Jefferson, although their token kindnesses do not matter much
					in the face of the death penalty their people imposed on Jefferson.
					Mr. Pichot shows some compassion toward Jefferson by offering to
					sharpen his pencil and then giving him the knife as a gift. Guidry
					kindly offers to leave the light on so Jefferson can write. Also,
					in the past, Guidry has allowed numerous visitors to see Jefferson.
					Guidry asks Jefferson to speak well of him in the diary, perhaps
					both because he wants kind things written about him and because
					he is anxious for Jefferson to like him. 

	Jefferson’s diary indicates that he places his faith
					in his tangible friendship with Grant, not necessarily in God. Jefferson
					does not know whether he should put his faith in religion, since
					different people say different things about it. Some say heaven
					does not exist for blacks, but Reverend Ambrose says heaven is for
					all people. Jefferson’s touching apology to Grant for crying shows
					that he worries about Grant’s feelings and about what Grant thinks
					of him. He credits Grant for convincing him that he is somebody.
					His diary attests to the fact that some combination of Grant’s influence
					and Jefferson’s own strength has allowed Jefferson to face his death
					with almost superhuman calm and understanding.

Gaines shows that the uneducated can possess intelligence
					and nobility. Misspellings and grammatical errors fill Jefferson’s
					diary, but they do nothing to detract from the sophistication of
					his thoughts and the bravery and sadness that comes through in his writing.
					In some ways, Jefferson’s writing seems superior to Grant’s. We
					know Grant’s writing intimately; he narrates the novel except for
					this chapter. Although Grant writes intelligent, affecting prose, he
					does not match the unembarrassed expression of emotion that comes
					through in Jefferson’s writing. Neither does he match Jefferson’s
					lyricism, especially in the last few lines of the diary, in which Jefferson
					notes the bluebird singing and the blue sky in the last few hours
					before his death.

