After arriving in the United States, Laura would take
					the girls window- shopping in department stores and try to invent
					things. At night she would lie in bed and sketch out household inventions
					and strange contraptions, like a child's double-compartment drinking glass
					with a straw. She thought it was a problem that her daughters wanted
					to become Americans and would argue with them in English, throwing
					in odd and confused idioms like "green behind the ears." She felt
					that she was a good Dominican mother, but a failure as an American
					Mom.

One night, she showed Yolanda a sketch of a car bumper
					with a removable can opener attached, which she thought would be
					convenient for picnickers. Her daughters felt frustrated that she
					was not able to better help them explore their identities as immigrants
					and withstand the pressures of discrimination and assimilation that
					they faced going to American schools. They felt that her inventions
					were a waste of time that she could have spent better supporting
					their efforts to fit into American culture. Though her mother compared her
					own creative effort to Yolanda's poetry writing, her daughter still
					disregarded the inventions. The daughters humored her because they
					realize that their mother's social status evaporated when she came
					to the United States, and she needed to create a new identity out
					of more than class snobbery. She became frustrated that she could
					not turn her good ideas into profitable business ventures, so she
					decided to organize her husband's office instead.

While in school, Yolanda was chosen to write a speech
					to be given to her class. She was embarrassed by her accent and
					feared being humiliated in front of her unfriendly and foreign peers.
					Her mother offered to help, but Yolanda wanted to do it herself.
					Carlos offered advice in Spanish, but the sisters did not understand
					most of his formal diction. She was inspired by reading Walt Whitman
					and wrote the speech quickly, finally satisfied that she sounded
					like herself in English. Her father was concerned with the political
					situation in the Dominican Republic and was considering returning
					the family to the Island. He was also scandalized by Yolanda's insubordinate
					and disrespectful attitude towards teachers, plagiarized from Whitman.
					Yolanda's mother defended the speech and further angered her father,
					who feared a house full of independent and Americanized women. He
					tore the speech into pieces, leading Yolanda to call him "Chapita,"
					the nickname used for Trujillo, the dictator of the Dominican Republic.
					Yolanda ran into her bedroom and locked the door until her mother
					came to help her write a new speech. Though full of bland platitudes,
					the schoolteachers liked it. Her father came home the next day with
					a new electric typewriter for Yolanda, and apologized for his behavior.
					After helping her daughter write the speech, Laura Garcia never
					invented again.

Laura Garcia's attempts to invent useful and profitable
					household gadgets reflect her desire to find a place for herself
					within the stereotypical American dream. Because her roles as a
					mother and wife have changed since the move from the Dominican Republic
					to the United States, she hopes to reinvent her own identity through
					her family and her new home. This process draws on the spirit of
					Whitman, who sang himself into being in Leaves of Grass, and
					reflects a particularly American way of seeing the creation of one's
					identity.

Yolanda's struggle to write in English and create a speech
					that reflects her own spirit mirrors her mother's struggle to come
					up with inventions that actually make sense. Her difficulty articulating
					her perspectives through the idioms of her new language also matches her
					daughter's trouble finding her own voice in English. These reasons
					contribute to Laura's sympathy for her daughter and pride in the
					speech that she first writes. Yolanda's first speech embodies the American
					attitude that encourages intellectual independence and aesthetic
					risk- taking, which she first encounters in Whitman's writings.

Her father's anger stems from his adherence to traditional Dominican
					values, which place importance on a child's obedient and humble
					submission to religious, parental and educational authority. Her
					mother does not see her speech as evidence of disobedience and disrespect
					because she appreciates the risks her daughter is willing to take
					to forge a new American identity for herself. Yolanda's response,
					comparing her father to the dictator Trujillo, draws attention to
					the aspects of American culture and society that her father left
					the Dominican Republic to embrace. She implies that blind submission
					to political authority represents the essence of dictatorship, injustice,
					and abuse of authority. Yolanda wants her father to recognize that
					he cannot encourage her to integrate herself into American society
					without also accepting the aspects of intellectual and civic liberty
					that do not easily fit into traditional Dominican culture.

The reconciliation between father and daughter reflects
					his willingness to let her invent herself as she must to fit into
					American culture, and his desire to encourage her ambition and talent
					through writing. Yolanda's second speech serves as a compromise
					between the American intellectual revolutionary and the Dominican
					traditionalist sides of her personality. Her mother helps her to
					integrate these two aspects of her heritage before discarding her
					hopes of fame and riches as an inventor. This may indicate Laura's
					disillusionment with the American dream, or her satisfaction with
					the role she has created for herself as a wife and mother to a Dominican
					family living in the United States.

