The narrator tells us that the historical accounts of
					Napoleon’s 1812 invasion of Russia are oversimplified
					and false. Napoleon did not rationally calculate the risk of invading
					Russia, but went in unaware of the dangers of a Russian winter.
					By the same token, Tsar Alexander did not lure the French into the
					Russian heartland, but on the contrary wished to keep them out.
					History has been written after the fact to lend a rational and intentional
					character to what originally were almost random events.

At Bald Hills, Mary endures her father’s blame for his
					quarrel with Andrew. She has only a vague understanding of the wars,
					and fears for her brother’s life. Her father still insists that
					Russia is safe, ignoring news that the French have already crossed
					Russian borders, and dismissing Andrew’s letter warning that their
					position at Bald Hills is dangerous. Increasingly grouchy and senile,
					the old prince occupies himself with his garden, construction on
					his estate, and his will and testament. Meanwhile, the prince’s
					servant Alpatych goes to the city of Smolensk to ask the governor
					about the risks of staying at Bald Hills. Gunfire is heard near
					Smolensk, indicating that the French are very close. The governor’s
					official report claims that Smolensk is safe, but, off the record,
					the governor recommends that the Bolkonskis go to Moscow. On the
					streets, people flee in terror, and the townspeople set Smolensk
					on fire to thwart the invaders.

By chance, Alpatych encounters Andrew, who writes a letter
					to Bald Hills telling his father and sister that it is urgent they
					flee to Moscow immediately. Andrew leads his regiment in retreat
					in the midst of a drought, his worldview altered by the abandonment
					and burning of Smolensk. He visits Bald Hills, now abandoned. The ruined
					fields and empty house deeply move him, and the sight of his soldiers
					bathing naked in a dirty pond—as cannon fodder—depresses and disgusts
					him.

In St. Petersburg, Helene’s and Anna Pavlovna’s salons
					continue almost unaffected by Napoleon’s invasion, with each salon
					holding a different opinion of the war. When Kutuzov is made commander in
					chief to heighten Russian military unity, he earns great praise, whereas
					earlier he had been criticized.

Napoleon, meanwhile, prepares to march upon Moscow. The narrator
					writes that historians overestimate the rationality behind Napoleon’s
					decision to march and his cunning use of a Cossack informer, Lavrushka,
					who, in reality, was a drunken looter.

The old prince and Mary are not in Moscow, but rather
					at Andrew’s estate at Bogucharovo, where the prince has been taken after
					a paralytic attack. He is too ill to travel, but Mary fears for
					his safety as the French approach. Tearfully, the prince finally
					expresses gratitude to his daughter for her lifetime of devotion
					to him. A local official arrives to tell Mary that she must leave,
					and she returns to the bedroom to find her father has died. Meanwhile,
					Bagration writes to the Minister of War to present the debacle in
					Smolensk in the best possible light. Alpatych tries unsuccessfully
					to force the local Bogucharovo peasants to relocate to Moscow.

After her father’s funeral, Mary lies in her bedroom until
					Mademoiselle Bourienne suggests that they ask the invading French
					forces for protection. But there are no horses to take her away,
					and the peasants are starving. Mary offers the peasants the grain
					stored at Bogucharovo and urges them to leave with her. They refuse
					her offer, however, thinking she wants to trick them back into serfdom.

Nicholas and two comrades ride to Bogucharovo by chance,
					not knowing it is a Bolkonski residence. Nicholas finds Mary stranded there,
					as the peasants refused to let her leave. He quickly brings order
					to the rioting peasants. On her way to Moscow, Mary thinks of Nicholas
					as her savior and wonders if she loves him. Nicholas too thinks
					of marrying her, a wealthy heiress and attractive as well.

Andrew, summoned to serve General Kutuzov, meets Denisov, now
					a lieutenant colonel, and reminisces privately about Natasha, whom
					Denisov had courted. Kutuzov arrives, fatter than ever. Andrew greets
					Kutuzov and tells him of Prince Bolkonski’s death. Denisov presents
					to Kutuzov his plan for breaking the French lines of communication.
					Andrew observes Kutuzov’s bored, faintly contemptuous seen-it-all
					attitude toward the officers reporting to him. At his lodging, Kutuzov
					interrupts his reading of a French novel to speak cordially with
					Andrew about the late old Prince Bolkonski and to voice frustration
					with military advisors. Andrew declines to serve the general at
					headquarters.

As the French approach Moscow, the behavior of the Muscovites becomes
					more frivolous. Violently anti-French publications are read throughout
					the city, and aristocrats try hard not to lapse into their habit
					of speaking French. Julie Drubetskaya, Boris’s wife, prepares to
					flee. Pierre risks bankruptcy to finance his own regiment, but does
					not himself prepare to fight. Julie teases Pierre that he is defending
					Natasha’s reputation for personal reasons, and also tells him that
					Mary is in town. Pierre is alarmed to realize that the French really
					will invade Moscow. Seeing a French cook being flogged as a spy,
					Pierre feels that he must leave the city. The thought of sacrificing his
					belongings for his country thrills him.

The Russian and French troops clash at the Battle of Borodino. The
					Russian forces are considerably weakened, though the narrator argues
					that Borodino can be viewed as a Russian spiritual victory. The
					narrator tells us that Russian historians have found a way to attribute
					the victory to Kutuzov’s military genius, but these historians are
					wrong. According to the narrator, there is nothing strategic about
					the choice of Borodino as battle site; like everything else in history,
					Borodino is the product of happenstance.

Leaving Moscow, Pierre comes upon a convoy of wounded
					soldiers. An army doctor tells him they have less than a third of
					the wagons they need to cart away the wounded from the next day’s battle.
					At Borodino, Pierre sees the French and the Russian encampments
					and watches a church procession in which Kutuzov kneels before a
					holy icon. Pierre encounters Boris Drubetskoy and also Dolokhov,
					who has weaseled his way into an important position. Dolokhov approaches
					Pierre and asks his forgiveness for past wrongs. Andrew, meanwhile,
					is miserable and disillusioned. He muses on his disillusionment
					with his ideals: he has lost faith in love and honor, in his father’s
					trust in his homeland, and in Natasha’s loyalty.

Pierre visits Andrew, who explains to him the folly of
					the military commanders and the unpredictability of war. Cynical
					about war in a general sense, Andrew still foresees a Russian victory
					at Borodino the next day. That night, he thinks of Natasha with
					longing.

In Napoleon’s quarters, the French emperor is finishing
					his toilette and preparing for the battle on the Russian front.
					He receives a portrait of his son as a gift. He sends an inspirational
					proclamation to the troops, and then inspects the battle site, sending
					out meticulously detailed instructions as to the deployment of troops.
					The narrator says that none of these orders were ultimately followed
					during the battle. Mocking the theory that Napoleon did not win
					at Borodino because he had a cold, the narrator again muses that
					history is made by ordinary men following their own will.

The next morning, Pierre awakens to the sounds of battle. Enchanted
					by the beauty of the scene, he rides into the midst of the fighting
					to observe, unaware that he is at the heart of the battlefield. Pierre
					shows no fear, and the officers allow him to stay. When something
					explodes next to him, however, he becomes terrified. Pierre returns
					to the battery to find that the French have captured it and that
					his recent acquaintances have been killed.

Napoleon, meanwhile, is surveying the battle, but neither
					he nor his officers really understand what is happening. His officers
					request reinforcements, and he grows troubled. Finally, news that
					the French are not doing well reaches Napoleon. He sees the strange new
					effects of military failure on the faces of his troops. On the other side,
					Kutuzov decides against a retreat, and the message spreads throughout
					the Russian troops, inspiring them.

Andrew’s regiment is still under heavy fire. He tries
					to encourage his troops, but he is wounded by an exploding shell
					and carried off in dazed confusion to the army hospital, conscious
					that there is something in life that he does not understand. In
					the military surgery unit, Andrew witnesses an amputation being
					performed next to him, and he recognizes the patient to be Anatole
					Kuragin. Andrew feels that compassion is the greatest human emotion.

Napoleon fails to feel any compunction when he muses on
					his defeat and all the lives lost. He rationalizes Borodino as merely
					an unfortunate miscalculation. Meanwhile, it rains on the field
					of corpses, and the soldiers are tired of killing. The narrator
					again muses on the irony that a bedraggled Russian army—one that
					lost a full half of its men—could be considered spiritually triumphant
					over the unstoppable French war machine. He concludes that the French were
					opposed by a spirit greater than their own.

The fact that the French army invades as far as Bald Hills,
					the Bolkonski estate, is symbolic of the end of the old prince’s
					seclusion from the modern world. A holdover from the bygone days
					of the previous tsar, resisting newfangled notions about modern
					statecraft and society, the old prince attempts to keep both himself
					and his daughter hidden away from the march of history. The eternal
					truths of geometry mean more to him than social progress or historical change.
					However, the prince’s growing irritability during the war years
					shows that he is not at peace with himself. With Napoleon’s entry
					into Smolensk, the prince’s naïve faith in old-fashioned times comes
					to a painful end. In this regard, his death is a symbol of the end
					of the Russian old regime: Russia will never be the same after Napoleon.
					Tolstoy hints that the aristocracy will lose some of its old entitlements,
					as we see when Princess Mary is stranded at Bald Hills because her
					peasants refuse to harness her horses. Similarly, the nobleman Pierre,
					visiting the battlefield of Borodino as the bullets whiz past, appears
					absurdly out of place among the practical commoners who are accomplishing
					the bulk of the victory. We feel that the new Russia will be less
					aristocratic and more down to earth.

Tolstoy’s final analysis of the Russian victory at Borodino amounts
					to a conclusion that a “greater spirit” than that of the French
					proves triumphant. The final conqueror of France has turned out
					to be neither brilliant Russian military strategy nor the unparalleled
					heroism of the Russian soldiers, but rather a mystical awareness
					of a Russian spiritual superiority. Tolstoy emphasizes that there
					is no rational explanation for why the French are not triumphant
					at Borodino. French troops significantly outnumber the Russians,
					yet somehow the ultimate spiritual victory is Russia’s. Napoleon’s
					self-serving rationalizations and shallow self-confidence have helped
					him conquer half of Europe, but they are no match for the grand
					spiritual example Kutuzov sets when he humbly kneels before a religious
					icon during a church procession. Napoleon believes in his own brilliance,
					but Kutuzov believes in something greater than himself. This belief
					is the same sense of belonging to the larger universe that Andrew
					contemplates when he stares at the sky at Austerlitz and that Pierre
					feels in his Masonic experiments. Tolstoy implies that, ultimately,
					it is humility rather than reason that emerges triumphant, whether
					on the battlefield or in the trials of everyday life.

