Early morning, Confederate camp. English military
					observer Arthur Fremantle awakens, excited at the prospect of watching another
					battle—and, he hopes, another Confederate victory. He chats with
					other foreign observers, most notably a fat Austrian named Ross,
					and he marvels at how wonderful it is to be in the camp of what
					he thinks is the winning side. He rides to Gettysburg and climbs
					a tree to get a good view of the scene. He sees the officers meeting
					to discuss the plans for the day, and he wonders if there is any
					chance of the Confederacy rejoining England after the war. Lee arrives
					to meet with Longstreet, and Fremantle—conscious that the soldiers
					are laughing at him as he hangs in a tree—comes down. He
					speaks briefly with Ross, who is dressed in his bright blue, amusing
					war costume, complete with a metal helmet. Fremantle is quite unaware
					of the grave nature of the battle, and he always believes that the
					gentlemanly South will naturally win the war:
					“Fremantle knew with the certainty of youth and faith that [Longstreet]
					could not possibly lose this day, not with these troops, not with
					Englishmen, the gentlemen against the rabble.” He is delighted,
					if a bit nervous, at the sound of the first cannon.

	Fremantle asks Longstreet why the Confederates have not entrenched,
					wondering why they are not worried about a Union attack. Longstreet
					replies that Meade would never attack, and also that the Union forces
					are so fortified in their position that they would not want to move.
					Longstreet says, as he always does, that the best action for the
					Confederates is to swing around the Union army and come between
					them and Washington, D.C. to force the Union to attack. Of course,
					Lee will not agree to this plan.

	Fremantle leaves to join his fellow Europeans. He muses
					again on how the “experiment” of America has failed, and the “equality
					of rabble” has changed back to a class system in just two generations—but
					only in the South. The South is “the Old Country.” He believes he
					has stumbled on something profound.

I was really thinking of killing him
						. . . and it was then I realized . . . I would kill them, and something
						at the same time said: you cannot be utterly right.

	Morning, Union camp just outside Gettysburg. Chamberlain
					sits with his regiment and awaits new orders. He cannot help thinking about
					his home in Maine, and his wife.

	Private Kilrain comes over and informs Chamberlain that
					they have discovered an escaped slave. He is a large man who speaks
					little English, but he manages to thank the Union soldiers. Chamberlain has
					the surgeon bind the man’s wounds and gives him food, but he cannot
					take the slave with the troops. He tries to point the slave in the
					right direction the best he can. Chamberlain is intrigued by the encounter—he
					has seen few black men in his life, and he finds himself somewhat
					bothered by his feelings when he sees the man. He feels slight revulsion,
					which occurs despite what he believes he should feel, and it irks
					him.

	He begins to move the regiment forward. Another colonel appears
					and informs Chamberlain that his group is headed toward the small
					hill—Little Round Top.

	Chamberlain again muses on the black man.
					He tells Kilrain that in his mind, there was never any real difference
					between black men and white men—black men have the same “divine spark”
					as other human beings. Kilrain says that while he has some reservations
					about blacks as a race, he thinks there are good ones and bad ones,
					just like white men. Chamberlain recalls an argument he had with
					a Southern preacher, who said that a Negro was not a man. Chamberlain
					left the room angrily. Another Southerner, a professor, came to
					him and apologized for the preacher’s behavior, but he said he could
					not apologize for his views. He tried to persuade Chamberlain intelligently,
					as Chamberlain had tried to do with the preacher, and he had asked Chamberlain,
					“What if it is you who are wrong?” At that point Chamberlain found
					that he wanted to kill the Southern professor, despite his mild
					nature, and it was then that Chamberlain realized that this disagreement
					might come to war. Yet he also had his doubts. Kilrain calls Chamberlain
					an idealist.

Chapter 1 reasserts Fremantle’s
					belief in the gentlemanly, Englishlike nature of the Confederacy.
					Fremantle, as a European, gives a perspective on Confederate culture
					from the outside. The Confederate forces are primarily white Anglo-Saxons,
					and the regular soldiers are mostly poor farmers and workers while
					the officers are all wealthy landowners. This class-based system
					also exists in England, and, consequently, Fremantle approves of
					it. He even hopes for a second that the Confederacy might rejoin
					the British Empire, which reveals just how misguided Fremantle’s
					opinions are. Shaara makes Fremantle into a foppish, silly figure,
					but since Fremantle’s part is based primarily on the book of memoirs
					the Englishman wrote just a few months after the battle, the characterization
					is probably one of the most accurate in the book.

	Chapter 2 is the only chapter
					in the novel that deals with the issue of slavery. Shaara does not
					generally address the South’s attitudes toward slavery, instead
					portraying the Confederate officers as fighting for “the Cause”—to
					protect their homeland and their way of life. There is little examination
					of the view that their way of life embodies racism and depends on
					slavery. The officers become indignant whenever slavery is brought
					up, and we never see nor hear the Confederates saying anything derogatory
					about blacks or slaves. Nor does Shaara try to paint the Northerners
					as noble comrades of African-Americans: Chamberlain, a Northerner,
					finds himself fighting feelings of revulsion when he meets an escaped
					slave who arrived recently from Africa. The slave is immensely muscled
					and he cannot speak English, and his traits give Chamberlain an
					unwelcome, animalistic impression of the black man.

	The discussion between Chamberlain and Kilrain, and the
					treatment of the black man by the Union soldiers, is perhaps a bit
					unrealistic. While there are jokes about selling the slave back
					to the Confederacy, the Union soldiers are mostly kind to him. In
					fact, however, prejudice existed just as much in the North as in
					the South. But thoughtful, intelligent Chamberlain shows some of
					the attitudes Union soldiers had toward the men they were fighting
					to free. By 1863, many soldiers, especially
					those on the Union side, had forgotten the reasons for the war and
					knew only that they had to fight, day in and day out. They were
					becoming disillusioned by numerous losses at the hands of the Confederates.
					The scene with the slave helps remind us, as well as Chamberlain,
					of one of the reasons why the Union is fighting the Confederacy.
					But Chamberlain is also sufficiently contemplative about whether
					or not that freedom is worth the cost of so many lives.

