Daytime, Gettysburg. General John Buford, commander of
					the Union cavalry, enters Gettysburg with his two brigades: 2,500 men, all
					mounted on horses. Buford is scouting the land ahead of the Union
					army. He spots a brigade of Confederate infantry in the town, and
					he is surprised to see them apparently without cavalry. He decides
					to remain in Gettysburg and sends a message back to the infantry
					commander, General John Reynolds, telling him that he has occupied
					Gettysburg and expects an even larger Confederate force to arrive
					the next morning.

	Buford surveys the area around the town and notices its
					“high ground.” Buford rides through the middle of the town with
					his men. The townspeople are relieved to see Union troops.

	Buford decides to occupy the hills
					with his men. They dismount and get ready to fight on foot. He hopes
					to prevent the Confederates from taking the high ground the next
					day until Reynolds arrives with his troops.

Nighttime, Confederate camp west of Gettysburg. The Confederate officers
					try to teach Lieutenant Arthur Fremantle, a British military observer,
					how to play poker. Longstreet muses on the upcoming battle. One
					of his aides, Sorrel, informs Longstreet that a soldier spotted
					Union cavalry in Gettysburg. The reporting officer’s commander,
					General Hill, thinks he must have seen a state militia, but Longstreet
					is not sure.

	Longstreet continues to brood, chatting briefly
					with Fremantle. General George Pickett, a good soldier and a perfumed
					dandy, arrives, much to everyone’s pleasure. Other officers under
					Pickett’s command also arrive: Lew “Lo” Armistead, Jim Kemper, and
					Dick Garnett.

	Pickett’s division has not had much action. Now, the
					division has been placed at the rear of the army. Pickett approaches
					Longstreet and asks that his division be moved up, but Longstreet
					refuses, adding that if the army has to turn and run, Pickett’s
					division will then be leading the fight to escape. Pickett leaves
					and Longstreet then talks to Armistead. Armistead’s old friend,
					General Winfield Hancock, is in the Union army, and Longstreet speculates
					that he may soon meet his friend—in battle. Longstreet tells Armistead
					that he would prefer to use defensive warfare tactics, such as trenches. Armistead
					replies that his ideas are sound, but that the Confederate army
					is not the army to try them out on. Besides, Armistead says, General
					Lee would never agree to defensive warfare, because he thinks it
					is somewhat dishonorable.

	Back at the poker game, several of the players,
					including a Southern politician, become upset at Fremantle for saying
					that the war is over slavery.

	The next morning, skirmishes begin between Buford’s men
					and the Confederate infantry in Gettysburg.

The most important event in Chapter 3 is
					Buford’s decision to try and hold the “high ground.” The high ground
					consists of four hills: Culp’s Hill, Cemetery Hill, Little Round
					Top, and Round Top. The hills are all connected by a long, crescent-shaped
					ridge called Cemetery Ridge. This high ground will be
					important throughout the entire novel. Control of the high ground
					gives an army several things: a good view of the entire battlefield;
					an excellent place from which to fire off artillery, meaning cannons;
					and a good defensive position. It is much more difficult to run
					uphill toward an enemy than it is to fire downhill at one. Little
					Round Top, in particular, has a lot of rocks that give good coverage
					against bullets and is so bare that it affords a view of several
					miles around. Civil War historians generally agree that the high
					ground was critical in the Battle of Gettysburg, and, therefore,
					Buford made an excellent move in realizing that fact and protecting
					it.

	The chapter also reveals the difficult decisions a soldier
					must make, especially in the absence of his superior officers. Buford
					is unsure whether the Confederates are really coming, and he is
					particularly worried that if he decides to try and stop the Confederates from
					taking the hill, General Reynolds will not arrive in time to save Buford’s
					brigades from heavy casualties and help keep the Confederates off
					the hills.

	By switching the narrative point of view between the
					story’s characters, Shaara is able to show how differently the various
					participants perceived the battle. Shaara establishes a pattern
					of choosing a single person on which to focus in each chapter, giving
					us only that person’s perspective on the situation. This kind of
					narration is known as third-person subjective. This is
					different from an omniscient narrator, who can dive into the thoughts
					of any character and can make comments and judgments external to
					the story. For instance, in Chapter 3,
					an omniscient narrator might tell us what Buford’s aide is thinking
					or comment in his own voice on how clever it was for Buford to secure
					the high ground. On the other hand, a subjective narrator never
					leaves the point of view of the character on which he is focused:
					we never read the thoughts of Buford’s aide, we only read Buford’s
					own thoughts. A subjective narrator does not interrupt
					the narration to make aside comments: the narrator might tell us
					what Buford’s personality or mood was like, but he would not remark
					on the importance of Buford’s decision to grab the high ground.

	Also, this use of third-person subjective
					narration creates a sense of suspense in a story whose outcome we
					already know. Shaara’s use of this form of third-person subjective
					narration means we are not always getting all the information about
					what is happening. Buford only knows his own thoughts: he does not know
					what General Reynolds is doing at any given moment, and he does
					not know what his aide is thinking unless he asks him. This style
					gives a very realistic portrayal of what events might have looked
					like to a participant, and in a novel that uses real-life historical
					characters, it is important for Shaara to make the characters seem
					as realistic as possible. People have been reading about Robert
					E. Lee, James Longstreet, and Joshua Chamberlain for more than a
					century. If Shaara wrote in the third-person omniscient point of
					view, the novel might have read like a very detailed history textbook.
					By using the subjective narration, Shaara draws us much deeper into
					the intricacies of characterization and mood, as opposed to merely
					the plot summary of the Gettysburg story.

	Chapter 4 is an excellent
					example of this technique of limited perspective. It is a long chapter
					that serves primarily to introduce the moody, intelligent Longstreet,
					who has recently lost three children and no longer socializes with
					his troops. The chapter also introduces nearly a dozen other characters,
					such as the pompous English lieutenant, Arthur Fremantle, and the
					dandy General Pickett. Fremantle serves primarily to reinforce
					the long-held romantic notion that the predominantly Anglo-Saxon
					Confederate officers were true gentlemen who passed their wealth
					on from generation to generation, in the tradition of British high
					society. In contrast, the Northern officers came from many different
					ethnic backgrounds and from a society in which anyone who earned enough
					money could become rich and a member of the social elite.

