By nightfall, the new prisoner has made an enemy of everyone
					in the cell. He threatens to take Alex’s bed, but Alex’s cellmates
					rally to his side and overrule the man. That night, Alex wakes to
					find the new prisoner lying next to him, running his hand over his
					body. Alex lashes out reflexively, punching the prisoner in the
					face. A fight ensues in the cell, and the other prisoners join in
					on Alex’s side. The noise soon causes a riot, and the guards arrive
					to find the new prisoner bloodied. They restore order, but as soon
					as they leave, the new prisoner incites another brawl, and Alex’s
					cellmates decide to teach him a lesson. Excited by the violence
					in front of him, Alex kicks the prisoner a few times in the head
					before they all go to sleep. 

In the morning, Alex and his cellmates find the prisoner
					dead. It isn’t long before the cellmates agree that Alex is chiefly
					responsible, and report the story to the guards, which reminds Alex
					of the treatment he received from his old, traitorous droogs. At
					this point, the prison goes into a lockdown. The prisoners sit silently
					in their cell for hours, until the Governor returns with the Head
					Warden and an unfamiliar, impeccably dressed man. These three men
					pace the hallways. When the new, important-looking gentleman finally
					speaks, Alex understands very little of what he says. The man, whom
					Alex later learns is the Minister of the Interior, criticizes the
					current “penological theories” and advocates treatments on a “purely
					curative basis” that kills “the criminal reflex.” In his speech,
					the Minister makes special mention of political prisoners. He then
					selects Alex to be the first in a new criminal correction program. 

The guards roughly transport Alex to the Governor’s office, where
					the Governor briefs him on his status. To his delight, Alex learns
					that the Minister has selected him for Reclamation Treatment, a
					two-week program which will culminate in the State releasing Alex.
					Alex pays little attention to the Governor, who doesn’t support
					the procedure, and eagerly signs a form granting the State permission
					to treat him.

Before Alex leaves Staja 84F, he’s brought to see the
					chaplain, who is very drunk. The chaplain laments Alex’s fate and
					wants Alex to know that he had no part in the decision. The chaplain
					goes on to question the ethics of a program that removes the desire
					to hurt and offend others. Alex, who knows nothing about his treatment
					other than it lasts two weeks, doesn’t quite understand the chaplain
					and finds the notion that he is “to be made into a good boy” laughable. 

The next day, the guards bring Alex across the prison
					yard to a new, hospital-like building. There he meets Dr. Branom,
					whom he instantly likes. Alex can’t believe his good luck as he’s
					given new clothes, slippers, his own room, magazines, and a cigarette
					with his lunch. When Branom describes the treatment, Alex feels
					even luckier. All Alex has to do is watch a series of “special films.”
					Branom also mentions a needle after every meal, which Alex assumes
					will contain a nutritional supplement. 

The first of these shots comes that same day, before his
					afternoon film session. Alex notices that he feels weak going into
					the session, but attributes his fatigue to the malnourishment he
					suffered in prison, and is confident that the hypodermic vitamin
					supplement will set him right. 

Alex’s second murder occurs under very different circumstances from
					the first, but it highlights many of the same character traits.
					In both the cases of the cat-lady and the new prisoner, Alex displays
					a blatant lack of compunction as well as a steady reliance on impulse and
					intuition to guide his reactions. These attributes drive the plot, since
					they are responsible for both his incarceration and his release. While
					Alex’s impulsive attraction to the Beethoven bust allows him to
					be captured, the reckless delight in violence that the Minister
					calls the “criminal reflex” subsequently gets Alex out of prison.
					It’s also important to note that these two murders suggest a less
					obvious, but no less important, aspect of Alex’s character. If death
					is not an unwelcome consequence of Alex’s crimes, it certainly is
					an unintended one. Even in his fantasies, Alex never connects death
					with violence. Alex’s neutral stance on death highlights a strong
					commitment to living, albeit in a somewhat warped manner. Death
					equates to inaction, and this is the very opposite of what thrills
					Alex.

The Minister’s speech in Chapter 2 provides a rare glimpse
					into the normally obscure inner workings of the government. By mentioning
					the need to make room for “political offenders” in the State’s prisons,
					the Minister insinuates that the government anticipates a period
					of increased political dissent. It seems reasonable, then, to assume
					that the government is about to undergo some kind of major transition,
					during which it will become even less tolerant of criticism and
					opposition. At this point, Alex’s new position as a pawn of the
					State comes into play. The new Minister, whom the Governor refers
					to as “a very new broom,” plans to sweep typical criminal—thieves,
					murderers, and violent offenders—out of the jails by treating them
					on a “curative basis.” Alex represents an ideal test case for this
					rehabilitative treatment since, as a young killer who stalks the
					streets at night, Alex represents many citizens’ greatest fears.
					If the State can successfully neutralize the threat posed by Alex and
					other young thugs like him, it can expect to parlay the citizens’ deep
					gratitude and new sense of security into political currency, thereby
					defusing the threat of insurgency as it makes its administrative
					transition. 

The Minister’s disenchantment with what he calls “outmoded penological
					theories” (i.e., imprisonment) is ironic, since it is the State’s
					own laxness on crime that has allowed prisons to become so dangerous
					and overcrowded in the first place. Early in the novel, Alex notes
					that there are significantly fewer policemen patrolling the streets
					at night, and those same officers only manage to apprehend Alex
					because his friends betray him. The State has insidiously indulged,
					possibly even encouraged, juvenile crime in the past because it
					keeps other citizens in a state of fear. But now, as it prepares
					for a period of even greater dominance, the State plans to use new
					technology to remove the juvenile threat, which represents not only
					a volatile social force, but also a negative public relations campaign
					for the government.

Through the chaplain, Burgess voices the novel’s most
					trenchant moral question: “Does God want goodness or the choice
					of goodness? Is a man who chooses the bad perhaps in some way better
					than a man who has the good imposed upon him?” The chaplain refers here
					to the Reclamation Treatment, a psychologically imposed behavioral
					modification that would render Alex incapable of performing evil
					deeds. Burgess would answer the chaplain’s question with an emphatic
					yes. Free will is an essential component of humanity, because without
					the power of self-determination, human beings wouldn’t have the
					chance to choose goodness. Ludovico’s Technique eliminates the essence
					of humanity by removing individual free will, which, by necessity,
					must include the option of bad behavior. Thus, when the chaplain
					laments that Alex will be “beyond the reach of the power of prayer,”
					it is because, deprived of the ability to make moral choices, Alex
					will cease to be a divinely created human being, and instead become
					a State-created mechanism: a “clockwork orange.”

