Mr. Hosokawa regularly visits Coss’s bedroom at night.
					He is in love, but he knows that the circumstances are extraordinary.
					He doesn’t believe his relationship with Coss will survive in the
					outside world. Hosokawa wonders if everyone experiences such love
					for a short time and then spends the rest of their lives remembering
					it. 

Each night in the china closet, Watanabe and Carmen alternate between
					making love and studying. Despite the power of their love, the narrator
					reminds us, Watanabe is still a hostage, and Carmen is still a terrorist.

Messner, the Red Cross representative, shows up looking
					haggard. He is the only one who seems worried about how this standoff will
					end. He is no longer trying to work out a compromise; he simply hopes
					to help the terrorists avoid a tragedy. After struggling to get General
					Benjamin’s attention, Messner explains that government action seems
					imminent. Messner begs Benjamin to surrender, but Benjamin refuses.
					During the conversation, Benjamin seems almost convinced that the
					government will just let them stay in the mansion forever. 

Watanabe, who is translating the conversation, understands
					that time may be growing short for the terrorists. Though this worries him,
					he can’t believe that anything bad will happen to Carmen. He thinks
					that because she is special to him, she will somehow be spared.
					Watanabe tries to forget all of the ways that tragedy is imminent
					so he can continue to believe that his love for Carmen will survive.
					In fact, the narrator tells us, “everyone forgot. Except for Messner,
					whose job it was to remember. And Simon Thibault, who even in his
					sleep thought of nothing but his wife.”

Coss continues to give Cesar his lessons. One afternoon,
					she is instructing him inside while everyone else is outside. Many
					people are playing soccer. Ishmael is helping Iglesias in the garden.
					Government troops come in. Coss sees them and screams. The troops
					kill Cesar and then, in the garden, they kill General Benjamin.
					Soon after the general’s death, the narrator says, the general’s
					brother is taken from prison and executed for conspiracy. The troops
					shoot Ishmael. The vice president sees Ishmael go down and rushes
					to him, weeping. Beatriz sees that all of the terrorists are being
					shot, but she can’t believe she will be shot, too. She thinks if
					she keeps her arms straight the government troops will see that
					she is surrendering, and spare her. Mendoza sees that Beatriz is
					in danger and rushes toward her. Beatriz smiles at Mendoza and is
					shot. 

Watanabe looks for Carmen, repeating, “She is my wife,
					she is my wife.” The narrator says that Carmen was killed right
					in the beginning. She and Hosokawa were in the kitchen and they
					rushed out when they heard Coss scream. Hosokawa was killed when
					he stepped between Carmen and the government troops to try to save her.

In Greek tragedy, the characters can’t escape fate. In Bel
						Canto, the captives can’t escape the inevitable onslaught
					of government forces sent to rescue them. That the happy captivity
					would end badly was never really in question, particularly after
					negotiations ceased, but the characters and perhaps we, the readers,
					were reluctant to admit it. As the lovers try to believe that their
					idyll will never end, Messner arrives to announce, as a Greek chorus
					would, that disaster is impending. But even Messner, the voice of
					realism, wants to wriggle out of what awaits. He counsels General
					Benjamin to surrender, overlooking or ignoring the fact that if
					the terrorists surrendered, they would certainly face execution.
					Death awaited the terrorists regardless of whether they surrendered
					or stood their ground.

Hosokawa is the one character who seems to understand
					and accept that the love he shares with Coss may be fleeting. Bel
						Canto is a novel with a large cast of characters, but Hosokawa
					is one of the characters we know best, and it is he who has gained
					the deepest understanding of life, love, and loss.

When Hosokawa steps between Carmen and the guns of the
					government soldiers, the gesture recalls the way Carmen stepped between
					Hosokawa and Beatriz when Beatriz trained a gun on them. These two
					gestures, mirror images of kindness, prove that the hostages and
					the terrorists are willing to risk their lives for one another.
					With this gesture, she reminds us of all the kindness that has gone
					between the hostages and the terrorists. 

In this final chapter, it is clear how completely Patchett
					has subverted the conventions of hostage stories. In most such stories,
					the reader would be urged to root for government troops to save
					the hostages from the evil terrorists. But in Bel Canto,
					the government troops are menacing forces of death, and the hostages
					weep over the deaths of their young captors. They mourn them as
					they would their own children. 

