After the death of “Stonewall” Jackson, Longstreet becomes
				Lee’s second in command. A stubborn man, depressed because of the recent
				death of his children, Longstreet enters the Battle of Gettysburg
				with high hopes of success, provided that Lee swings the Confederate
				army to the southeast and comes between the Union army and Washington,
				D.C. Longstreet knows that this strategy would make the Washington
				politicians force the Union commander, George Meade, to attack the
				Confederate army. If the Confederates dig into good ground, then
				they can simply destroy the Union army as it comes at them. The
				disagreement between Longstreet and Lee regarding this strategy,
				however, forms the main conflict between the two characters. Lee
				is continuously annoyed by Longstreet’s stubbornness, and Longstreet
				is depressed by Lee’s opposition to his defensive tactics.

	Shaara portrays Longstreet as a man ahead of his time,
				someone who has seen the future of warfare and knows that it will
				be won through the proper use of technology. He envisions the fact
				that offensive warfare will become exceedingly difficult in the
				future. But this vision of Longstreet does not necessarily correspond
				to history. Longstreet became an advocate of defensive tactics after
				seeing how well they worked for the Confederate forces at the Battle
				of Fredericksburg—his belief in their efficacy did not come from
				some visionary understanding of the future of warfare. Longstreet
				had some advanced ideas, but few of them were put into effect, and
				those that were often failed. Lee’s decision not to follow his general’s
				advice was understandable as well: Lee had an impressive list of
				strategic victories prior to the Battle of Gettysburg. In this instance,
				Longstreet’s suggestion probably would have worked well, but Longstreet
				had made suggestions in the past that had not worked. Also, Lee’s
				strategies at Gettysburg were continually thwarted, sometimes by
				his own men. If Lee had with him at Gettysburg “Stonewall” Jackson,
				a man who understood Lee better than anyone else and knew how to
				move troops well, Lee’s strategies might very well have worked.
				When considered in relation to history, Shaara’s portrayal of Longstreet
				is decidedly too sympathetic. Longstreet takes little blame for
				the loss, when in fact his delays on the second and third days caused
				serious problems for the Confederate army’s attack.

