The boys find the Manse in Oldtown, an older section of
					the city where the streets are quieter and the houses statelier.
					Anxious to establish his leadership, Alex insists on trying his
					usual ploy of sweet-talking his way through the front door. This
					time, however, Alex’s scheme doesn’t work, and the old woman inside
					refuses to open the door. Determined, Alex has Dim boost him up
					to the window above the front door. Once inside, Alex decides that
					he’ll do the job alone. By the time he opens the front door for
					his droogs, he plans to have incapacitated and raped the old woman
					and located the most valuable possessions in the house.

Alex’s idea backfires, though, when he finds the old woman
					in a large, well-lit room completely overrun with cats. As Alex approaches
					her, he becomes distracted by a bust of Beethoven on the mantle,
					and slips on one of the many milk saucers littering the floor. The
					old woman begins rapping him on the head with her walking stick.
					Stunned, Alex manages to knock her off balance, but as he kicks
					her he steps on a cat, which responds by attaching itself to Alex’s
					leg with its teeth and claws. Frantic, Alex trips on another saucer,
					and as he comes crashing down, the old woman attacks him, calling
					on her cats to help. To Alex’s amazement, the cats swarm around
					him, hissing and scratching. Now in a rage, Alex rises and, with
					a silver statue he has taken from another room, hits the woman on
					the head and knocks her unconscious. 

Hearing a police siren in the distance, Alex runs for
					the front door, figuring the old woman must have called the police
					before he broke in. He finds Dim waiting for him outside with his
					chain. Before Alex realizes he’s been betrayed, Dim whips him in
					the eyes and runs off, laughing. Abandoned by his droogs, Alex gropes blindly
					in the hallway until the police arrive. The policemen taunt Alex
					as they kick and punch him, and they seem to know Alex by name.
					Alex is then driven away in a squad car.

Beaten and dismayed, Alex finds himself in a very bright,
					white room with four officers. Alex demands a lawyer and gets laughed
					at and punched in the stomach. He makes his situation worse by retaliating
					and kicking an officer in the shin. The police respond by beating
					Alex until he vomits, which Alex seems rather ashamed of. On top
					of this, Alex receives a discouraging visit from P.R. Deltoid. Deltoid
					looks at Alex coldly, as if Alex were only a “thing,” and although
					he assures Alex that he’ll come the following day to speak on Alex’s
					behalf, he spits in Alex’s face before leaving.

The officers then force Alex to make a statement confessing
					his crimes. Alex tells them everything from the past twenty-four
					hours, making sure to include his treacherous friends. When Alex
					finishes his statement, the police drop him in a holding cell crowded
					with criminals and drunks. As soon as Alex is thrust in there, he
					has to fight off two prisoners who try to molest him. With the help
					of a guard, Alex is eventually left alone to get some sleep. He
					dozes, transfixed by thoughts of Beethoven’s Ninth. During this
					reverie, Alex envisions a place where satyrs play flutes and Beethoven’s
					head floats in the sky, shining like the sun. He imagines new, violent
					lyrics for the “Ode To Joy.” An officer wakes him up and Alex is
					taken to a new office, where he learns that the old woman he assaulted
					has died.

If, in previous chapters, Alex feels justified in praising
					the virtues of intuition over intellect, in these two chapters he
					experiences firsthand how intuition can fail him. Alex’s trouble
					with the cat-lady and his subsequent arrest are caused by his youthful
					impetuousness. Whereas earlier chapters exhibit, in one critic’s
					words, “the naked beauty of an uninhibited psyche,” these chapters
					reveal the self-endangering potential of a cocksure punk, ruled
					by his immature urges. Juvenility proves both a benefit and a disadvantage
					for Alex. In the past, being underage has allowed Alex to avoid
					serious legal trouble, but now it seems to have led him toward punishment
					and incarceration. The saucers of milk that Alex trips over recall
					the Korova Milkbar, a haven for young delinquents. Milk is also
					a substance closely associated with youth and infancy, and we’re reminded
					of its nurturing quality when the older women in Chapter 1 protect
					the boys, maternally, from the policemen. At the Korova, milk becomes
					associated with the brash, violent power of youth; at the cat-lady’s
					house, it becomes a symbol of youth’s arrogance and foolhardiness.

Another recurring motif—classical music—plays a central
					role in Alex’s downfall. Alex becomes distracted by a bust of Beethoven, and
					subsequently trips and becomes vulnerable to the old woman and her
					cats. Alex finds himself drawn to the statue, even though, at that
					moment, he’s in no position to lose his concentration. Disregarding
					reason, Alex impulsively moves toward the bust; in this case, Alex
					would have been better off following his intellect over his instinct.
					Alex’s love for classical music, however, will also be depicted
					as a redeeming force. Near the end of Chapter 7, Alex manages to
					comfort and protect himself by concentrating on Beethoven’s Ninth. 

In Burgess’s eyes, the State’s cruelty toward Alex is
					a far graver perversion of morality than any of Alex’s crimes. Burgess
					has said that “the violence in the book is really more to show what
					the State can do with it.” The State of A Clockwork Orange has
					a legal monopoly on the use of violence, and as such, it may observe
					or reject the law as it sees fit. As the arm of government, the
					police who arrest Alex instantiate this power, and they exploit
					the law for their own pleasure when they beat Alex without cause.
					These men are as thuggish and brutal as any of Alex’s droogs, and
					Alex bitterly notes the hypocrisy of their esteemed place in an
					institution that supposedly upholds goodness—“if all you bastards
					are on the side of the Good then I’m glad I belong to the other
					shop.” This is the second time Alex refers to “the other shop,”
					and here the phrase takes on a richer meaning. Alex at this point
					is not expostulating abstractly from his kitchen—he is bloodily
					revolting against the hypocrisy of a State that wishes to harm him
					while simultaneously exhorting him to be a good, dutiful citizen.
					Alex’s subsequent confession of all his crimes, then, represents
					an impassioned assertion of his identity against the State. 

