No character in The Brothers Karamazov is
				afflicted with more trauma or inner conflict than Ivan. Ivan is
				a brilliant student with an incisively analytical mind, and his
				intelligence is directly to blame for his descent into despair.
				Unable to reconcile the horror of unjust human suffering—particularly
				the suffering of children—with the idea of a loving God, Ivan is
				consumed with doubt and argues that even if God does exist, he is
				malicious and hostile, and loves to torture mankind. Ivan believes
				that human concepts of morality are dependent on the idea that the
				soul is immortal, meaning that people only worry about “right” and
				“wrong” behavior because they want to experience pleasure rather
				than pain in the afterlife. Because of his feelings about God, Ivan
				himself is unable to believe in the immortality of the soul, and
				thus he argues that good and evil are fraudulent categories, and
				that people may do whatever they wish without regard for morality.
				But Ivan only starts thinking about these concepts in the first
				place because he loves humanity—it is his concern for human suffering
				that initially leads him to reject God. His logical disbelief in
				morality is terribly painful for him because it would make a way
				of life such as Fyodor Pavlovich’s, which Ivan detests, an acceptable
				mode of human behavior. Dignified and coldly moral, Ivan
				wants to be able to accept an idea of goodness that would exalt
				mankind and reject Fyodor Pavlovich’s brutishness, but, trapped in
				his own logic, he is unable to do so. He is so beset with doubt,
				and so defensively determined to keep the rest of humanity at a
				distance, that he is unable to act on his love for Katerina, and
				seems to scorn the very thought of pursuing happiness for himself.

	After Smerdyakov murders Fyodor Pavlovich, Ivan’s crisis
				of faith becomes more traumatic still. Convinced by Smerdyakov that Ivan’s
				philosophy made it possible for Smerdyakov to kill Fyodor Pavlovich,
				Ivan is forced to confront two very difficult notions: first, that
				he is responsible for another human being, and second, that his beliefs
				have paved the way for murder. Ivan’s subsequent collapse into hallucination
				and madness represents the novel’s final rejection of his skeptical
				way of life. When the novel ends, Ivan is feverish and unconscious,
				having been taken home by Katerina to recuperate, and his future
				is uncertain. It may be that, with Katerina’s love, he will find
				a way to accept Alyosha’s faith or come to terms intellectually
				with morality and his own responsibility for others. Or it may be
				that he will never resolve his crisis—he may become permanently insane.
				But the extremely optimistic note on which the novel ends suggests
				that he will find some form of redemption.

