The title character of the novel, Don Quixote is a gaunt,
				middle-aged gentleman who, having gone mad from reading too many books
				about chivalrous knights, determines to set off on a great adventure
				to win honor and glory in the name of his invented ladylove, Dulcinea.
				Don Quixote longs for a sense of purpose and beauty—two things he
				believes the world lacks—and hopes to bring order to a tumultuous
				world by reinstating the chivalric code of the knights-errant. Initially,
				Don Qui-xote’s good intentions do only harm to those he meets, since
				he is largely unable to see the world as it really is.

As the novel progresses, Don Quixote, with the help of
				his faithful squire Sancho, slowly distinguishes between reality
				and the pictures in his head. Nonetheless, until his final sanity-inducing
				illness, he remains true to his chivalric conception of right and
				wrong. Even though his vision clears enough to reveal to him that
				the inns he sees are just inns, not castles as he previously believed,
				he never gives up on his absolute conviction that Dulcinea can save
				him from all misfortune. Furthermore, even when Don Quixote must
				retire from knight-errantry, he does so in the spirit of knight-errantry,
				holding to his vows and accepting his retirement as part of the
				terms of his defeat at the hands of the Knight of the White Moon.
				Despite his delusions, however, Don Quixote is fiercely intelligent
				and, at times, seemingly sane. He cogently and concisely talks about
				literature, soldiering, and government, among other topics.

No single analysis of Don Quixote’s character can adequately explain
				the split between his madness and his sanity. He remains a puzzle
				throughout the novel, a character with whom we may have difficulty
				identifying and sympathizing. We may see Don Quixote as coy and
				think that he really does know what is going on around him and that
				he merely chooses to ignore the world and the consequences of his
				disastrous actions. At several times in the novel, Cervantes validates
				this suspicion that Don Quixote may know more than he admits. Therefore,
				when Don Quixote suddenly declares himself sane at the end of the
				novel, we wonder at his ability to shake off his madness so quickly
				and ask whether he has at least partly feigned this madness. On
				the other hand, we can read Don Quixote’s character as a warning
				that even the most intelligent and otherwise practically minded
				person can fall victim to his own foolishness. Furthermore, we may
				see Don Quixote’s adventures as a warning that chivalry—or any other
				outmoded set of values—can both produce positive and negative outcomes.
				Given the social turmoil of the period in which Cervantes wrote,
				this latter reading is particularly appealing. Nonetheless, all
				of these readings of Don Quixote’s character operate in the novel.

