Valerian is in great pain and sits in his greenhouse thinking
					about the time he found Michael hiding under the sink. He used to
					believe that Margaret had a drinking problem, and he is very upset
					now to realize that he was wrong and that her long history of erratic
					behavior resulted from guilt about abusing Michael, not from alcoholism. After
					the Christmas dinner, Margaret tried to explain her behavior to
					Valerian, but she sickened him when she told him that she abused Michael
					because it felt delicious. Valerian wanted to hurt her during her
					explanation but could not.

At two in the morning on Christmas night, Sydney comes
					into the dining room to see Valerian. Sydney and Ondine lack financial
					security, and their financial future depends on Valerian. Sydney
					asks Valerian if he plans to fire them, and Valerian says he does
					not know because all he can think about is the image of Michael
					under the sink. Valerian tries to achieve an emotional release by
					crying and wants to cry tears of blood, but he cannot cry. Finally,
					around dawn, he goes to bed.

The morning after Christmas, Margaret wakes up very early
					and feels relieved that her secret was revealed. She washes her
					hair very vigorously and feels hopeful about the future, but the
					rest of the people at L’Arbe de la Croix are full of sorrow or anxiety.
					Sydney and Ondine remain worried about being fired, and Valerian
					is still in a state of shock. Margaret insists on trying to tell
					Valerian more details of her abuse of Michael, and she insists that
					she had not really hurt him, still trying to explain her actions.

A few nights after Christmas, Margaret announces to Valerian that
					she has called Michael and told him to uninvite B. J. Bridges for New
					Year’s. Valerian is horrified and incredulous that she has had the
					nerve to contact Michael, but she insists that Michael is not damaged.
					Valerian notices that she actually looks prettier and also stronger.
					He asks her why Michael did not confide in him, and she speculates
					that he may have been ashamed. Now Valerian finally begins to cry
					because he cannot understand why Michael still loves her. She begs
					Valerian to hit her, but he will not. He tells her that perhaps
					he will hit her tomorrow, but when the next day comes she asks him
					again and he again says tomorrow. Frustrated, Margaret cannot think
					of a way to lift either of their moods.

New Year’s Day arrives and Margaret asks Ondine why she
					kept Michael’s abuse quiet. Margaret thinks Ondine wanted to feel
					superior to her. Ondine admits she kept it quiet was because she
					was afraid Valerian would fire her, and maybe Sydney, too. Margaret says
					Ondine should have stopped her and mentions that she was only nineteen,
					while Ondine was thirty or thirty-five. Ondine corrects her and
					says that she was only twenty-three. After Margaret suggests that
					maybe they can be friends now, Ondine smiles but is not receptive.
					After New Year’s, Valerian retreats to his greenhouse and spends
					most of his time there, letting the plants go wild. In his guilty
					haze, he has lost any sense of the value of order there. A dead plant
					is as good as a live one. Giving up, he lets the ants invade.

The new fast-paced, manic life of Jadine and Son in the
					city contrasts with the other characters’ lives on the island. On
					Isle des Chevaliers, time moves extremely slowly, and pages pass
					before a single day does. The sense of physical confinement is also
					powerful. Valerian sits still as a stone contemplating his failed
					life first at the dinner table and then in the greenhouse, where
					the air is described as being filled with pain. Because Valerian
					did not control what happened to Michael so many years ago, he does
					not try to gain control of anything else in his life, which is why
					he lets the ants invade the greenhouse. Margaret tries to slip reassuring
					words to him as they pass each other on the stairs, which implies
					that in this home, contact is inevitable, no matter how he might
					try to avoid it. Even when Margaret tells him that she phoned Michael
					about uninviting B. J. Bridges, Valerian does not scold Margaret
					as harshly as he could. Valerian knows that no matter how hard he
					tries to understand what went wrong with Michael, he knows Margaret
					destroyed their relationship with Michael

As Jadine and Son retreat further and further into an
					almost childlike state in the city, those on the island find themselves
					suddenly in a state of terrible maturity. With knowledge comes the
					loss of innocence, just as in the biblical story of Adam and Eve
					in the Garden of Eden. That Valerian’s downfall also came about
					through seeking the truth emphasizes the parallel with the story
					and the pain that knowledge brings. Similarly, Margaret parallels
					the Eve character because she delights in something she should not—in
					this case, the harming of her child. In opposition to the biblical
					tale, Valerian retreats into his garden, the greenhouse, rather
					than being expelled from it. But the space has been ruined for him
					by the knowledge. Like Adam and Eve, he is now aware of what he
					did not know before, and he cannot return to the state of innocence.

Valerian’s acceptance of entropy into the greenhouse,
					as he ceases to protect against the soldier ants and to carefully
					nurture his plants, is a sign of how he has yielded his position
					to the unstoppable force of nature. This yielding displays Valerian’s
					downfall, but the narrator describes Valerian’s downfall with empathy.
					Valerian could easily have been written as a caricature: a foolish
					old man who neglects his son and cannot see the horrors committed
					in his own house. Instead the narrator presents his decline as something
					beautiful and noble, even tragic. In comparison, the narrator never
					turns on Margaret by denouncing her or making her look cruel. Margaret’s
					point of view is faithfully represented throughout the chapter, and
					the sense of renewal that she gains through her confession is presented
					with deep empathy and psychological accuracy. The chapter portrays
					each character as acting from a specific history and set of reasons.
					None of the characters are dismissed out of hand or considered lost.

The empathy Margaret, Sydney, and Ondine feel for Valerian emphasizes
					the internal conflicts within each character. When Margaret goes
					into the kitchen to apologize to Ondine, she feels bad about abusing
					Michael but is convinced he has not been affected by it. However,
					Ondine’s refusal to absolve Margaret is completely understandable
					and utterly revealing. Her unwillingness to tell Margaret’s secret
					about the abuse displays her loyalty toward her family because she
					does not think Sydney could bear being separated from her if Valerian
					only fired her. Margaret’s theory of why Ondine never told anyone
					about the abuse and Ondine’s real reason displays a disconnection
					between the two characters. For Margaret, a self-involved and pampered
					woman filled with insecurity, Ondine’s silence was naturally about
					her. But Ondine’s silence came from a much simpler desire to keep
					her job. The reasons for their actions are intimately tied to their
					specific experiences and histories. The narrator makes both of those
					perspectives strong and believable without attempting to reconcile
					Margaret and Ondine.

