“[T]he Quest is achieved, and now all
						is over. I am glad you are here with me. Here at the end of all
						things, Sam.”

The next morning, Sam gains new strength and a grim sense
					of responsibility. He wakes Frodo and pushes him on toward Orodruin.
					The land before them is cold and dead, dotted by countless craters
					and hollows. The hobbits crawl eastward from hiding place to hiding
					place. After a few miles, Frodo is nearly spent, his mind and body
					tormented by the terrible weight of the Ring. He refuses to give
					the Ring to Sam, for he knows he is held by its power. The two decide
					to take to the road once again. All eyes in Mordor are turned to
					the west, where the Captains march toward Morannon.

After three draining days of travel, Frodo’s limbs give
					way and he falls, exhausted. Sam picks Frodo up and carries him
					on his back. Before nightfall, they reach the foot of the mountain.
					Sam carefully makes his way up the slope. It is nearly morning.
					For a moment, the shadows dissipate, and Sam can see the flicker
					of the piercing Eye from Sauron’s Dark Tower. Its gaze passes by
					the hobbits and turns to the north, focusing on the Captains of
					the West. However, the glimpse of Sauron’s power causes Frodo to
					panic. His hand grasps for the Ring around his neck, and he cries
					for Sam’s help. Sam kneels beside Frodo and gently holds his master’s
					palms together in his lap.

Afraid Sauron has spotted them, Sam takes Frodo upon his shoulders
					once more and continues up the mountain. With much difficulty, they
					finally reach the top. Sam looks down over a great cliff into the
					burning Cracks of Doom below. Suddenly, a cruel weight hits Sam
					from behind, and he falls forward. Behind him, he hears the voice
					of Gollum, cursing Frodo viciously for his treachery. Frodo and
					Gollum engage in a violent struggle, and Gollum proves stronger
					than the weakened Frodo. Suddenly, Frodo commands Gollum, “Begone,
					and trouble me no more!” and the creature falls to his knees. Frodo
					presses on to the Cracks of Doom. Sam, tempted to slay Gollum with
					his sword, refrains out of pity. Gollum slinks away.

Reaching the Cracks, Frodo turns to Sam and, with a voice clearer
					than Sam has ever heard, informs him that he will not complete the
					quest. The Ring, Frodo declares, is his. He puts the Ring on his
					finger and vanishes. Sam is once again flung aside, and then he sees
					a dark shape leap over him. Just as Sam looks up, the Great Eye of
					Sauron suddenly becomes aware of Frodo. The eight remaining Nazgûl
					hurtle toward the mountain at terrifying speed.

Sam sees Gollum struggling with an invisible enemy, biting
					at the air viciously. Frodo suddenly reappears, his hand bleeding
					from his severed finger. Gollum pulls Frodo’s finger and the Ring
					from his mouth joyfully, but then steps backward, unaware that he
					is close to the edge of the cliff. Gollum then falls, along with
					the Ring, into the Cracks of Doom. Mount Doom shakes violently as
					it accepts and consumes the Ring. Sam runs out into the daylight,
					carrying Frodo. The Nazgûl wither in the fiery ruin of the hill.
					Frodo stands by Sam’s side, himself again. Sam feels overjoyed,
					and Frodo explains that, were it not for Gollum, he would not have
					been able to finish the quest. Frodo says he is glad to be with
					Sam “at the end of all things.”

The completion of the quest marks the central climax of The
						Lord of the Rings. While the novel has included several
					separate, progressively larger climaxes—such as the overthrow of
					Saruman and the battle for Gondor at the Pelennor Fields—the deposit
					of the Ring into the Cracks of Doom resolves the major conflict
					presented at the outset of The Fellowship of the Ring. All
					of the markings we might expect from the climax of such a voluminous
					quest narrative are present: Mount Doom erupts, towers fall, and
					Sauron’s dark shadow vanishes in the wind. In one sense, the effects
					of Frodo’s success are endless. Middle-earth is freed from Mordor’s
					evil influence, ensuring renewed hope and progress for its inhabitants.
					In another sense, however, Frodo himself gains little from depositing
					the Ring in the Cracks of Doom. The hobbit finds no treasure or
					maiden, and does not rescue any captives. He only emerges from Mount
					Doom with a greater self-understanding and the ability to say, as
					the world collapses around him, that he is content to be with his
					friend Sam.

Frodo and Sam continue to add to the picture of Hobbit
					heroism that Tolkien has developed throughout the novel. Notably,
					Frodo’s heroism is purely passive. He must be carried up Mount Doom, almost
					against his own will, weeping and exhausted. At the end of his quest,
					he refuses to part with the Ring. Frodo announces to Sam, “I have
					come. . . . But I do not now choose what I came to do.” This passage
					highlights once again the importance of choice in Tolkien’s conception
					of good and evil. Choice has been the distinguishing factor of Frodo’s
					heroism throughout the novel. Unlike Sauron, whose fate is bound
					to the Ring, Frodo possesses the power to choose whether to carry
					the Ring or not, and whether to wear it or destroy it. He remains
					a hero simply because he has chosen to carry the
					Ring for so long in a quest that aims only to destroy an object
					that offers him great power. That Frodo wills himself to move forward
					as far as the Cracks of Doom is evidence enough of his heroism.
					The success of the journey from the beginning has been doubtful;
					only a sense of providence and hope has suggested Frodo might accomplish
					the task. In an ironic twist of fate, the Ring’s most possessive
					owner, Gollum, wrests the Ring from Frodo and inadvertently destroys
					it.

Sam’s self-sacrificing heroism on the journey up Mount
					Doom complements Frodo’s passivity in its loving gentleness. As
					Sam selflessly carries Frodo up the mountain, he is struck that
					his master is lighter than he expected. When Frodo struggles with
					an uncontrollable urge to grasp the Ring, Sam gently removes his
					master’s hand from his chest and holds his palms together. The image
					suggests two men praying, implying that Sam redeems Frodo in a spiritual
					sense. Sam’s feet and controlling hands aid Frodo in the choice
					to move toward the Cracks of Doom, which Frodo indicates he still
					chooses to do only in his acquiescence.

The last leg of Frodo’s journey also reveals much about
					the ambiguous nature of evil. At first blush, the Ring continues
					to symbolize actual physical evil. Frodo bears the immense physical
					weight of the Ring and its evil, eventually losing all bodily strength
					as he gets closer to Mount Doom. When Sam picks Frodo up—and thus picks
					up the Ring as well—he finds his friend to be light, and he is able
					to remove Frodo’s groping hand from the Ring with a gentle tug.
					Tolkien suggests that only the Ring’s wearer perceives its heaviness—its
					physical force remains a matter of perception, not of real weight.
					In this sense, we return to Tolkien’s characterization of evil as
					a human creation; physical symbols of evil only display real power
					over those who are tempted by them.

Tolkien further examines the ambiguous nature of evil
					in the imagery of the land of Mordor. Sauron’s Great Eye, fixed
					atop the Dark Tower, functions both as a symbol of the Dark Lord’s
					will and as the source of his ability to enact his will on the physical
					world. The Great Eye itself does not cause any harm—it does not
					strike anyone down or emit any visible signal. The Eye only suggests where
					Sauron’s attention is fixed. It focuses to the north while Sauron’s
					mind remains occupied with the forces at the Black Gate, thus allowing
					Sam and Frodo to reach the goal of their quest.

