On Sunday, Reverend Gail Hightower watches the street
					from his small bungalow. He looks through his study window and out
					across his lawn, gazing at the faded sign advertising the services
					he once offered as an art teacher. Hightower originally came to
					Jefferson years earlier as the minister of the local Presbyterian
					church. Aloof and disengaged, he was prone to giving obsessive sermons
					about his grandfather, a Civil War cavalryman who was shot from
					his horse in Jefferson.

Ultimately, Hightower was driven from his post at the
					church after his adulterous wife was found dead at a Memphis hotel,
					where she had been staying with another man. Hightower had long
					tried to cover up for his wife’s behavior, but once word of the
					scandal at the hotel spread, his parishioners turned on him and
					forced him out of his ministry. Rather than leave town, he bought
					a home and settled permanently in Jefferson, despite being ostracized
					from the community, accused of taking a black woman as a lover,
					and severely beaten by the Ku Klux Klan. After twenty years, the
					townspeople have grown to ignore if not accept Hightower, who lives
					as a recluse. Much of his sordid past has been forgotten, although
					vicious rumors of interracial lovers still circle him.

Hightower watches the August darkness fall over the street
					outside when suddenly he sees a strange figure walking up his path.
					It is Byron Bunch, who is never in town on Sundays.

Unnerved and guilt-ridden because of his feelings for
					Lena, Byron has sought out Hightower for words of comfort and advice.
					He tells the minister what happened after Lena’s unexpected appearance
					at the mill. After convincing Lena not to go off immediately in
					search of Joe Brown at the Burden place—which was still burning—Byron took
					Lena to his residence at Mrs. Beard’s boardinghouse, telling his landlady
					that Lena would be meeting her husband and needed to rest. Mrs.
					Beard put Lena in the boardinghouse for the night.

Moreover, Byron informs Hightower that the fire was not
					the only disaster that occurred at the Burden house the previous
					day. The first man to reach the burning house was a man passing
					by with his wife in a wagon. Running into the house, the man found
					Joe Brown drunk at the bottom of the stairs, suspiciously trying
					to deflect the man’s attentions from upstairs. Nonetheless, the
					man forced his way through and went upstairs to find Miss Burden slumped
					on the floor, almost entirely decapitated. When the man went back
					downstairs, Brown was gone.

Once the fire was put out, Byron says, Miss Burden’s nephew
					in New Hampshire offered a reward of $1,000 for
					the capture of her killer. Brown showed up promptly at the police
					station to claim the reward, declaring Joe Christmas the killer.
					Brown revealed that Christmas had been Miss Burden’s lover for nearly
					three years and that Christmas threatened to kill him if he spread
					this information. Then, Brown said that on the morning of the fire,
					Christmas told him he finally killed Miss Burden. When Brown sensed
					that the sheriff was questioning his credibility, he abruptly revealed
					that Christmas was part “negro” blood. Suddenly convinced of Christmas’s guilt,
					the officials locked Brown up and rounded up a posse to search for
					the presumed fugitive.

Hightower asks Byron whether he has told Lena about Brown’s current
					predicament, and Byron replies that he has not, because he is afraid
					that Brown will go on the run again.

One of the major themes of Light in August is
					the isolation of individuals from communities and from one another.
					In the first four chapters of the novel, Faulkner presents four
					major characters, each of whom is separated from society in some
					important way. Lena Grove, though she relies cheerfully on the kindness
					of strangers, is morally isolated because of her illicit pregnancy
					and socially isolated because of her constant traveling. The sullen
					Joe Christmas is isolated because of his seemingly mixed racial
					heritage, which causes him to emphasize the differences between
					himself and those around him. Byron Bunch is, like Lena, morally
					isolated, though by his own choice; he makes no friends except Gail
					Hightower and works almost all the time because he is so afraid
					of how he might spend his time otherwise. Hightower himself is isolated
					as an outcast, rejected by society—in his case because he failed
					in his appointed task as guardian of public standards, delivering
					incoherent sermons while his wife carried on obvious sexual affairs.

Faulkner establishes similarities between Hightower and
					Lena early on. Both characters use language willfully to manipulate
					or obscure the truth. Just as the church elders were unsure whether Hightower,
					in lying to cover up his wife’s indiscretions, “believed what he
					was telling or not,” Lena also distorts the facts surrounding her
					pregnancy and status as an abandoned single mother. Even though
					community gossip exposes both Lena’s and Hightower’s predicaments,
					they both continue in their distortions as a form of self-protection,
					a way of easing the shame they feel at being betrayed by their respective
					partners. In an attempt to salvage some form of dignity, they sidestep
					the truth, broadcasting elaborate self-delusions to try to justify
					the failings and misdeeds of their loved ones.

Even though neither Lena’s nor Hightower’s excuses fool
					anyone, they reveal competing layers of truth, representation, and belief—layers
					that Faulkner uses to infuse his characters with complexity and
					dimensionality. Characters’ interior states, with all their inconsistencies
					and unspoken motivations, overlap with the generalized voices of
					the community to create a dynamic and realistic portrait of individuals
					constantly asserting and renegotiating their places in the larger
					social order. In the face of these pressures, characters are left
					fractured, their various states of consciousness threatening to
					divide and unsettle them. Though the characters search for a sense
					of stability, belonging, and consistency, their inherently fractured
					natures consistently conspire to thwart these desires.

Faulkner often refers to these fractured natures implicitly, through
					imagery. For example, as Hightower, wounded and frozen in his self-imposed
					exile, sits listening to Byron relate Lena’s story, “it is as though
					there were two faces, one imposed upon the other.” This image serves
					as an apt summation of one of Faulkner’s many preoccupations in
					the novel. In plumbing the depths that exist beneath people’s words—the
					vulnerabilities, fears, and evasions that often do not register
					in articulated speech—Faulkner portrays inherently inconsistent
					and self-contradictory nature of identity. People, he argues, in
					all their complexity, cannot be reduced to a simple summation or
					generalized description. What exist instead are warring impulses
					and an often wide gulf between private and public worlds.

