Richard takes a job in another optical shop, where he
cleans and runs errands. The black elevator man, Shorty, amuses
Richard, as he is clearly sensible and intelligent but nonetheless
totally willing to demean himself for money. Several times Richard
witnesses Shorty allowing a white man to kick him for a quarter.
A Northern white customer notices Richard’s thin frame and tries
to offer him money to buy food, but Richard is too ashamed to accept
it. Meanwhile, Bess and Mrs. Moss have finally come to understand
that Richard has no interest in joining their family.

To amuse themselves, Richard’s foreman, Olin, and the
white employees of a competing optical shop try to instigate a fight between
Richard and Harrison, the black employee in the other shop. They
tell each man that the other is planning to kill him. Richard and
Harrison meet secretly and figure out what is going on, but they
still remain suspicious of one another. The white men offer to pay
Richard and Harrison five dollars each to box one another. They
agree, planning to fake the fight. When the fight starts, however,
Richard and Harrison realize that they do not know how to fake it.
Their frustrations at being manipulated take over, and they fight
each other genuinely and viciously.

I concluded the book with the conviction
that I had somehow overlooked something terribly important in life.	

Richard reads an editorial in a Memphis newspaper that
attacks H.L. Mencken, the essayist and critic. Intrigued that a
Southern newspaper would attack a white man, Richard resolves to
read some of Mencken’s work. As blacks are not permitted to borrow books
from the public library, Richard asks a white Irish Catholic coworker,
Falk, if he can use Falk’s library card to check out books. Falk
agrees but urges Richard to be careful.

Richard forges a note from Falk to the librarian, asking
that she give “this nigger boy” some Mencken books for him. The
librarian is momentarily suspicious but gives Richard the books.
Mencken’s boldness and verbal swordplay inspire Richard to become
a voracious reader. The books bring him an exciting new understanding
of life, and he hungers to do some writing of his own. Richard cautiously
hides his books from his coworkers, who notice that he has become
distant and dreamy. That winter, Richard’s mother and brother join
him in Memphis. Alan gets a job, and the family anxiously saves
money for the trip to Chicago.

Soon after Richard’s mother and brother arrive, Maggie
moves to Memphis because her husband, Matthews—the mysterious “Professor”—has
abandoned her. Desiring to reach Chicago as quickly as possible,
everyone decides that Richard and Maggie will go first and get a
place for the four of them. The other two will follow once they
have enough money.

Southern whites do not like it when black people move
to the North because it implies that the blacks do not like the
treatment they receive in the South. To minimize this friction,
Richard waits until only two days before his departure to tell his
boss that he is leaving. Moreover, in order to minimize the appearance
that he actively wants to leave the South, Richard says that he
is leaving only to be near his mother. Richard’s white coworkers
at the optical shop appear bewildered by the news and become slightly
resentful. Falk, however, gives him a sly smile. Shorty is jealous
that Richard is leaving and bids him a bittersweet farewell, lamenting
that his own laziness will likely prevent him from following Richard’s
lead.

