“Is there world enough for me?”

Albert is thrilled that Carmen came to the wedding and
					insists that Carmen be included in the pictures, even though she’s
					wearing jeans. After dinner, she dances with Paul, who tells her
					he and Skeletor broke up and that Carmen makes Albert happy. Then
					she dances with Albert, who vows to be honest with her from now
					on. Carmen sends the Pants to Lena. In the letter, she says that
					she and Tibby have used the Pants well.

When Tibby finishes her shift, she goes to the back entrance
					of Wallman’s, crying because she knows Bailey won’t be showing up. Tucker
					Rowe finds her there and asks if she wants to have some coffee.
					Tibby says no, realizing she no longer has a crush on him. Then the
					woman with long fingernails, whose name is Angela, tells Tibby she
					knows Bailey is sick and that she and Bailey talked together once a
					week over iced tea.

Lena receives the Pants on her last day in Greece, and
					they give her the push she needs to tell Kostos how she feels. She
					takes her painting and finds him at the forge. They sit down together
					on a wall, and Lena gives him the painting. Then Lena tries to tell
					him what she wants to tell him, but her words come out in a jumble.
					She manages to apologize for the confusion with their grandfathers. Then,
					racked with nerves, she plows ahead and tells him she likes him.
					She kisses him, and Kostos kisses back.

“In your eyes I am complete.”

After visiting Bailey, Tibby goes to see Brian McBrian
					at the arcade. He teaches her how to play Dragon Master.
					He admits he’s been visiting Bailey every day, and he shows Tibby
					the portable video game system he bought for her. When Tibby leaves,
					she thinks about how a lot of small things can add up to happiness.

During Lena’s final breakfast with her grandfather, she
					realizes that it’s okay for them to sit in silence. Her grandfather
					tells her she’s his girl.

Tibby can see that Bailey’s health is declining. Bailey,
					while playing Dragon Master, asks Tibby when her
					friends will return, and how Brian McBrian is doing. Tibby tells
					Bailey she’s a good judge of character. Bailey is falling asleep,
					and she gives Tibby the game’s controls, telling her to keep playing.

Bridget writes to Lena, telling her she feels “strange.”
					She writes again to say she’s frightened.

On the plane home from Greece, Lena worries over Bridget’s
					letters. She knows that Bridget still suffers over her mother’s
					death and that she gets scared sometimes when she feels alone and
					powerless. She wakes up Effie and tells her she’s going to go to
					Los Angeles, instead of home, to get Bridget.

Tibby gets a phone call from a sobbing Mrs. Graffman,
					and she knows Bailey is dead. She goes to the funeral with Bailey’s
					mismatched group of friends: Angela, Brian, Duncan, Margaret, Carmen.
					Late that night, unable to sleep, she takes Mimi out of the freezer
					and rides her bike to the cemetery. She tucks Mimi into a small
					hole she digs near Bailey’s grave. For a moment, Tibby feels like
					dying too, but then she gets up, vowing to live well for Bailey’s sake.

Lena makes her way to Bridget’s camp. She finds Bridget
					in bed. Outside, she gives Bridget the Pants and asks Bridget to
					tell her what happened. Bridget tells Lena she helped already just
					by coming.

Death touches all the friends in some way, either this
					summer or at some point in their past. Dealing with death forces
					them to gain new perspectives and learn how to cope with grief.
					Bridget has dealt with death for many years, since her mother died,
					and she continues to struggle with her feelings of loss. Without
					a mother to support her, Bridget often feels lost, and she leans
					on her friends to be a steady source of comfort and strength for
					her. Lena learns about Kostos’s sad family history, with his whole
					family dying in a car accident, and her knowledge changes her perspective
					on both Kostos and herself. Kostos, even though he’s experienced
					great sadness, is still willing to open up his heart, whereas Lena
					is not. This realization helps Lena to take more risks in her life.
					Carmen doesn’t face a physical death this summer, but she confronts
					the death of her fantasy relationship with her father, which was
					rooted in their avoidance of conflict. Only by opening up to each
					other can they revive their relationship and grow closer. Tibby
					must deal with two deaths this summer: Mimi’s and Bailey’s. Always
					strong and feisty, Tibby is laid low by her encounters with death,
					unsure about how to deal with them. At first, she opts to simply
					deny reality. Through her sadness, though, she eventually finds
					a new will to make her own life count.

Unlike Bridget, whose brazenness leads to heartbreak with
					Eric, Lena finds happiness when she makes a bold move for Kostos.
					Until now, Lena has lived passively, hoping someone would come along and
					pull her out of her quiet, private realm. She has hoped Kostos would
					look at her, but she didn’t take any action to make it happen. She
					has wanted him to know she likes him, but she never actually told
					him, nor did she give him any clues. Lena is terrified of taking risks
					that leave her vulnerable to rejection, but Kostos is so important
					to her that she finds the courage to bear her heart to him. The novelty
					of this experience leaves her flustered and nervous, but she ultimately
					finds happiness. Bridget, accustomed to such boldness and unfamiliar
					with rejection, pursues Eric without thinking twice. Her experience
					is not new—but the devastation that comes to her is.

Bailey befriends the people Tibby had pinpointed as ridiculous losers
					for her film, teaching Tibby about the importance of looking beyond
					appearances to find out what people are really like. Tibby had dismissed
					the Wallman’s manager, Duncan, as being absurd, because he was a
					stickler for the Wallman’s rules. But Bailey got to know him enough
					to see how much he liked having Tibby around the store. Tibby had
					written off Angela, because of her extremely long fingernails, but
					Bailey took the time to talk to her, uncovering the sad, vulnerable
					woman underneath. Brian seemed like a complete loser to Tibby, with
					his video game obsession and terrible fashion sense, but, with Bailey’s
					help, Tibby sees the good person inside. Eventually, Tibby opens
					herself up to Brian and lets him teach her how to play Dragon
						Master, and she realizes that there’s more to Brian than
					she gave him credit for. And Bailey had instant compassion for Margaret,
					the movie theater employee who has memorized bits of dialogue. Tibby,
					quick to sarcasm but not to kindness, learns a lot from Bailey in
					the short time they spend together. The scene at the gravesite shows
					that Tibby will keep Bailey’s lessons in mind for the rest of her
					life.

