Celia Bowen

One of the protagonists of the novel and the illusionist in the Night Circus. Celia is the daughter of Hector Bowen, who binds her in a magical game against Marco that defines her entire life. Celia has a natural aptitude for magic, though she is most talented at manipulating fabrics. She has curly brown hair and dark but bright eyes. Celia is strong-willed and determined.

Read an in-depth analysis of Celia Bowen.

Marco Alisdair

One of the protagonists of the novel and a magician who helps operate the Night Circus. Marco is an orphan who is adopted by the man in the grey suit so that he can compete with Celia in a magical challenge. On the surface, Marco is scholarly and reserved, though he is also secretive and meticulous. He comes to be driven by his love for Celia as the challenge binds their fates together. He naturally has grey-green eyes and dark hair, but he magically alters his appearance to look more striking. He is particularly good at binding magic and illusions.

Read an in-depth analysis of Marco Alisdair.

Hector Bowen/Prospero the Enchanter 

Celia’s father and one of the magicians behind the challenge. Hector is a talented and ancient magician who performs under the name Prospero the Enchanter. He has dark eyes and hair, and is power-hungry, arrogant, and callous. Prospero’s arrogance leads him to overestimate his abilities, causing him to transform into a ghostly shadow that struggles to remain connected to the world.

Read an in-depth analysis of Hector Bowen.

The man in the grey suit/Alexander/Mr. A.H—

Marco’s teacher and one of the magicians behind the challenge. Known by several names throughout the novel, the man in the grey suit is a mysterious magician who operates in secrecy and shadows. He is aloof and most people who encounter him forget aspects about him or their interaction with him entirely. He does not have a shadow and is grey in his features as well as his dress.

Read an in-depth analysis of the man in the grey suit.

Bailey Clarke

A young man who loves the Night Circus and ultimately becomes its proprietor. Bailey grows up on a farm in Massachusetts but dreams of being whisked away on an adventure. He is smart and imaginative.

Read an in-depth analysis of Bailey Clarke.

Penelope Aislin “Poppet” Murray

A performer at the Night Circus capable of seeing the future. Referred to as “Poppet,” she is Widget’s twin sister. She has bright red hair and light eyes. She was born several minutes after midnight on the opening night of the circus. She is outgoing, confident, and has feelings for Bailey Clarke.  

Winston Aidan “Widget” Murray

A performer at the Night Circus capable of seeing the past. Referred to as “Widget,” he is Poppet’s twin brother. He has bright red hair and light eyes. He was born several minutes before midnight on the opening night of the circus. A skilled storyteller, he is always hungry and quite outgoing.  

Chandresh Christophe Lefèvre

A theater producer and the founder of the Night Circus. Wealthy and eccentric, Chandresh has a keen sense of theatricality and an eye for design. He becomes single-mindedly obsessed with the circus and grows paranoid as a side effect of being roped into the magical challenge between Marco and Celia.  

Isobel Martin

The fortune teller at the Night Circus and Marco’s first lover. Isobel is particularly skilled at divination with tarot cards. She has light eyes and hair somewhere between blond and brown. Isobel is polite but curious. 

Herr Friedrick Thiessen

The creator of the Wunschtraum clock and the founder of the rêveurs. Herr Thiessen is a masterful clockmaker who becomes known for his writings about the Night Circus. He delights in the circus and often dresses in all black, white, or grey, along with a scarlet accessory, which starts a fashion trend among the rêveurs. He is close friends with Celia Bowen and corresponds with many other rêveurs. Herr Thiessen is affable and warm and prefers not to know how the circus works. 

Ethan Barris

An architect and one of the Conspirators who helps create the Night Circus. Timid and unassuming, Mr. Barris is polite and well-put together. The magical influence of the Night Circus causes his aging process to slow, and though he no longer needs glasses, he continues to wear them.  

Tara Burgess 

One of the Conspirators and sister to Lainie. She has chestnut hair, hazel eyes, and a Scottish accent. She has dabbled in many occupations along with her sister, eventually becoming a consultant. She is friendly but grounded. Both sisters are known for their keen attention to detail, but Tara is more observant.  

Lainie Burgess

One of the Conspirators and sister to Tara. She has chestnut hair, hazel eyes, and a Scottish accent. Both sisters are known for their keen attention to detail, but Laine is the more imaginative one. Lainie is cautious but warm. She has feelings for Ethan Barris but worries that he, like everyone else, conflates her with her sister.  

Tsukiko

A contortionist who performs at the Night Circus and the victor of the previous challenge. She is small in stature and has long black hair. Elegant and calculating, she is deeply invested in the circus and is a skilled magician. 

Ana Padva

A former ballerina turned fashion connoisseur and one of the Conspirators. Often referred to as Mme. Padva or Tante (aunt) Padva, Ana Padva is a close friend of Chandresh Lefèvre.

