Understanding how white Americans experience being white helps explain why they have trouble talking about race. Most whites, once they understand the white dominated system into which they were born, would choose not to be part of it. But they did not have that choice. Widening their perspective can help white people see how this system affects their interactions with people of color. Seeing their position in the system can also help lessen their defensiveness when challenged and identify ways to repair interpersonal damage.

White people are relatively free of racial stress, because they are born into the dominant society and immediately belong. They recognize people who look like them in positions of influence and in popular culture. They are socialized to be wary of situations where they might be in the minority, which they hear characterized as dangerous, so they do not place themselves in those situations. When applying for a job, and being hired, they can rely on the meritocratic belief that they were the best person for the job. 

White people enjoy freedom of movement partly because their racial caste has been normalized as simply human. Whiteness is usually not remarked upon, whereas non-whiteness is. For this reason, people of color generally avoid traveling to areas where their non-whiteness would be noticed. Unless required for a work reason, Black people will probably not voluntarily travel to Idaho, where many avowed white supremacists live. Whites do not usually have to eliminate otherwise perfectly safe destinations from their itineraries. White solidarity also encourages whites to protect their own if a white person should say something racially problematic. This further normalizes white advantage, by not rewarding white people for challenging the status quo. This acceptance ultimately helps maintain the racial hierarchy, and becomes a form of racism, when the collective fails to support a person of color.

Every day, white people see representations of successful people who look like them. Of the fifty richest people on earth, twenty-nine are American. Of those twenty-nine, all are white and all but two are male. White fragility is triggered especially in white men who believe their economic status is threatened by the rising status of people of color. Instead of directing their justifiable anger at the wealthy white, powerful elite, white fragility misdirects their anger toward Black people and other people of color supposedly stealing their jobs and opportunities. 

White people who grow up not knowing people of color claim a lack of experience with racism and its damaging effects. But people of color can attest that the total actions of the dominant group can have devastating effects. White Americans continue to associate crime and danger with Black neighborhoods and congregate in suburbs where the crime rates are lower, and schools are better. They do not stop to reflect that if they stayed invested, urban areas might not fall prey to stereotypes of poverty. These racist ideas also permeate the judicial system, which is largely dominated by whites. Over and over, white defendants are shown leniency due to poverty or a bad home life, while Black people are sentenced as if they were inherently bad people.

These disparities continue because of the effects that segregation continues to have on American lives. Although Americans continue to believe in the American Dream, which relies heavily on the idea of meritocracy, the truth is that most American institutions play a big part in putting white people ahead of people of color. Segregation also insulates white people from witnessing the struggles of Black people. When confronted with these real truths, white people are naturally uncomfortable and wish to distance themselves from the problem. But if they are made aware of the mechanisms at work, they can learn how to change the status quo and make it more equitable.

