Lamott emphasizes telling the truth and says it is a primary
					component of good writing. She advises her students to start by
					writing about their childhoods. If the enormity of this topic seems
					overwhelming, she suggests starting with memories of their first
					few years of school. However, the important thing is to just begin
					writing something and to capture the details of some event. If this doesn’t
					work, Lamott advises writing about a particular holiday. Ultimately,
					writing is simply a matter of sitting down and plunging in. Writers
					may suffer from insecurities, worries, and distractions, but it
					is crucial to continue to write and persist with faith, despite
					the obstacles the mind might throw at you. 

Lamott emphasizes that something salvageable can often
					be found, even in a piece of bad writing. Writers must be open to
					the twists and turns their stories take, even if those twists and
					turns result in an entirely different story than the one they originally planned
					to write. Her students respond to Lamott’s writing advice by asking
					how they can find an agent. But Lamott continues to emphasize the
					actual process of writing rather than publication. 

Lamott’s students are fixated on being published. She
					repeatedly cautions both her students and her readers that publication
					is not some magical solution that will rescue writers from the hardships
					of reality. 

In “Short Assignments,” Lamott states that novice writers should
					always start with short assignments so they are not overwhelmed.
					Lamott then describes how she sits down to write each day and how
					she is utterly unfocused until her glance falls on the square, one-inch
					picture frame on her desk. The little picture frame reminds her
					to focus on just a small piece of the whole story. When a writer
					starts with a small focus and then widens it gradually, the story
					will come together more easily. 

Lamott describes the advice her father gave to her brother
					when he was overwhelmed by a school project on birds. Her father
					told her brother to take it “bird by bird.” Along those same lines,
					Lamott advises her students to focus on small steps, rather than
					on the entire project.

In Part One, Lamott discusses her students’ response to
					her methods of teaching and suggests that her students are too concerned
					with getting published. Lamott is far more interested in teaching
					them how to write. Additionally, as she points out, there is no
					secret to publishing success. 

However, even when her students misinterpret her or do
					not listen, Lamott is good-humored. She remains devoted to writing
					and teaching, and she understands her students’ interest in the
					publishing world, even as she tries to keep it in check. While many
					writing guides focus on the finer points of the publishing business,
					Lamott goes out of her way to make it clear that this is not her
					emphasis.

Lamott often talks about “small things,” both in life
					and in writing. She explains how writers can discover large stories
					by beginning with the smaller details. In some ways, this methodology
					is similar in spirit to a religious ceremony, where the focus is
					on ritual that inspires faith in a greater force. Lamott’s use of
					the small picture frame to remind her to work on details is a meditative
					technique, and it focuses her on a manageable task.

When Lamott describes the act of writing, she refers to
					“mining a vein of memories.” In encouraging students to write about
					their families and their memories, Lamott emphasizes a memoir-inspired style
					of writing much like her own. This reinforces the idea that writing
					is a private process that is connected to family and personal experiences.
					Lamott suggests that writing about memories will often mean reliving
					or channeling painful and uncomfortable details, but it will also
					occasionally provide catharsis, and it will always give you good
					source material for writing. 

Lamott disputes the misconception that successful writers
					simply sit down and churn out fully formed passages and chapters.
					Instead, she suggests that nearly every writer, no matter how successful, writes
					what she calls a “shitty first draft.” In fact, Lamott suggests that
					a shitty first draft is an almost obligatory starting point. She recalls
					writing restaurant reviews for California magazine.
					Her reviews would take shape only after she gave herself permission
					to write a terrible first draft. 

Lamott addresses the “other voices” that exist in the
					head of every writer: the critic, the perfectionist, and so on.
					Every writer can be plagued by these voices, and fighting the voices
					is part of the process of writing. She recommends a mental exercise
					in which the writer listens to the voice, envisions the speaker
					turning into a mouse, and then imagines dropping the mouse into
					a bottle. One must keep writing even though the inner voices are
					saying that the work is no good.

Lamott discusses perfectionism and the terrible pressure
					it can create. She believes that it can almost certainly ruin your
					work, and therefore it is essential to push past it. Lamott states
					that a belief in God is helpful with this problem. If writers don’t
					believe in God, it is then helpful to be compassionate toward their
					own attempts at writing. She describes how a good story is like
					a thin thread of smoke that the writer must follow. The quest for
					perfectionism will prevent the writer from following this thread
					and finding the story. 

When a student complains of writer’s block, Lamott suggests writing
					about school lunches. She believes that the dynamics of writing
					and the dynamics of school lunches are very similar. As in writing,
					the school lunch has many facets: the fact that fathers inevitably
					screw up at making a school lunch; the idea that the sandwich bread
					must be white; and even the desire to have limp lettuce so other
					kids won’t tease. The entire concept of the subject is so broad that
					it is best to focus on one small part of the lunch itself. This
					mental exercise helps students to realize that only by zoning in
					on the specifics can one really begin the process of writing. 

When asked for her best piece of advice on writing, Lamott recalls
					the response of writer Natalie Goldberg. Goldberg had held up a
					yellow pad and mimed writing on it, implying that the best way to
					improve one’s writing is to just sit down and do it. Lamott says that
					this Zen-like advice is the best she has heard.

At the end of the lunch exercise, Lamott finds herself
					recalling a loner who always sat by a fence along the edge of the
					schoolyard. It takes a while for Lamott to remember this interesting
					character, but through the process she arrives at what she feels
					is the beginning of an interesting story. This confirms the point
					of the exercise: to discover a story you didn’t know existed when
					you started writing. Lamott compares writing to developing a Polaroid;
					the story, like the photo, develops over time. She recalls attending
					the Special Olympics to write an article. At first she found the
					search for a story slow and tedious, but eventually a story developed
					and took on a life of its own. Her patience allowed the story to
					develop over the course of a day. 

Lamott’s most important piece of advice to aspiring writers
					is to sit down and write without worrying too much about the result.
					This is the theme of the chapter called “Shitty First Drafts.” By
					giving writers a sense of their creative freedom, she reminds them
					they can be as out of control and goofy as they want. It is the
					act of writing, rather than the final result, that is crucial. Unlike
					the urge to write (which she describes as magical), the practice
					of writing is a craft.

In this chapter, Lamott makes direct references to God
					and Christianity. Lamott, a devout Christian, often emphasizes the
					mystical aspects of writing, and she draws on the teachings of various
					religions to convey the difficulties of a writer’s job. As in most
					religions, Lamott’s writing involves blind faith, perseverance,
					discipline, and a connection to something greater than herself.
					In order to deal with the trials and tribulations of writing, Lamott
					emphasizes discipline and perseverance in the face of self-doubt.
					She advises struggling writers to write about childhood memories
					or any random subject in order to just keep the pen moving as much
					as possible. In short, she asks the writer to have faith, even when
					everything seems bleak. 

Lamott’s discussion of “inner voices” is her attempt to
					quell the fears and uncertainty that plague most writers. In order
					to deal with guilt, paranoia, and criticism, she thinks of them
					as beings with individual personalities and often does visualization
					exercises in order to banish them. In other words, she vanquishes
					the voices that hinder creativity through more creativity. 

Lamott refers to her friend’s idea that each person is
					given one emotional square acre of his own. To know a character,
					writers must know everything in that character’s emotional acre,
					from what the character carries in her purse to what she likes to
					eat. Characters must develop organically, rather than forcing predetermined
					behavior and actions on them. Lamott emphasizes that characters,
					like stories, develop over time. Each character grows out of a different part
					of the writer’s personality, which means the writer will both love
					and hate his or her characters. 

Lamott says nothing is more important than a likable narrator, and
					writers themselves must like the narrators they create. While the narrator
					must have faults, she must never be boring or annoying to the reader.
					The narrator must be interesting and reliable, unless unreliability
					is one of his intended flaws. The writer’s job is ultimately to
					tell the truth about the characters.

Lamott believes that plot grows out of character; consequently,
					a story must never be forced on its characters. As an example, she
					uses Faulkner’s plots, which emerge from his flawed, beautiful,
					crazy characters. She emphasizes that the plot must be like a dream
					that is “vivid and continuous.” The reader must want to keep reading,
					just as you might want to keep dreaming to find out what happens
					next. She also thinks it is helpful for someone else to read your
					work and serve as “the executioner” to passages that don’t work. 

Lamott says that if she gives her class a topic to write
					on—for example, two people going through a divorce—every student
					will come up with a different story. The   power of the plot comes
					from traditional elements of drama: the setup, buildup, and payoff.
					Lamott explains that a good climax will unfold slowly from all the
					previous actions and change at least one character profoundly.

Dialogue is particularly important, because good dialogue
					can give a story life and bad dialogue can ruin it. Lamott recommends reading
					dialogue out loud to decide whether it sounds realistic. She also
					says that readers must be able to identify each character by what
					he says. She suggests putting characters who hate each other together
					and seeing what develops. Dialogue shows an emotional understanding
					of characters, and writers should have some compassion for all of
					their characters. Finally, she recommends visualizing a “helper”
					in your head who hands you information about your characters from
					your subconscious.

In describing the creation of character, Lamott draws
					from her own experiences. She thinks characters are often just waiting
					to be found. Once again, she stresses the importance of perseverance
					and faith. Writers must go through a long, slow process of discovery—not
					unlike self-discovery—in order to create compelling characters. Lamott
					makes the process of characterization very personal. In describing
					what she considers an “interesting” character, she draws from herself,
					her friends, and her relatives, blurring the lines between real
					and fictional characters. Lamott says characters must be likable.
					For her, likable characters have personalities similar to those
					of her friends. For other writers, likable characters may have another
					kind of personality. What’s important is the writer’s attitude toward
					her characters, not the characters’ specific traits.  

Lamott’s descriptions of plot development focus not on
					the mechanics of creating a story but instead on the idea that stories develop
					from the characters. Plot will simply occur if writers create interesting
					characters. She refers to several writers, including John Gardner
					and E. M. Forester, to support her idea that plot is derived from
					the behavior of a given character, especially when that character
					is faced with unusual or difficult situations. By avoiding a discussion
					of the mechanics of plot, Lamott stays true to her theory that learning
					to write is like learning to live. She is less interested in the mechanics
					of either, preferring to describe the story that is written properly
					and the life that is lived properly. 

In her discussions of the technical aspects of writing,
					such as plot, character, and dialogue, Lamott generally advocates
					faith in the writing process as a cure-all. Writers must believe
					that they will discover characters and come up with natural, unforced
					dialogue. This organic approach to writing is less specific than
					the advice often found in how-to books, which advocate more organized,
					methodical approaches to writing. In many instances, Lamott sidesteps
					strict instructions in favor of a more general philosophy. She speaks
					of writing as a valuable process that results in a living, breathing organism
					with various wants and needs. 

According to Lamott, one of the best ways to design a
					story setting is to do research with experts in a particular field.
					If a story is set in a wealthy neighborhood, the writer should interview
					a wealthy person and learn about her life. Lamott says that when
					she wrote a novel that involved gardening, a topic about which she
					knew little, she contacted a greenhouse and spoke to a gardener
					who helped her design a fictional garden. Based on her research,
					she was able to create a character so believable that Lamott’s readers
					assumed Lamott was an avid gardener. Lamott says that in addition
					to research, she often visualizes her settings before she starts
					writing.

In the next chapter, Lamott describes an artist who envisioned
					his painting in a particular way. Whenever he saw the final product,
					he would redo it. With each false start, the artist knew more about what
					he didn’t want and therefore came closer to what he did want. Lamott
					says the false starts of writing are often like this painter’s work. 

Lamott describes her monthly visits to a nursing home,
					where she talks with the elderly, and often dying, patients. She
					feels depressed and demoralized by the visits, but she keeps going.
					She realizes that these people might be stripped of all their vitality
					and health, but they retain their humanity. Writers must scrutinize
					their characters and discern what is beneath the surface, just as
					Lamott scrutinizes the nursing home residents. Often, what the writer
					starts with is not the true soul or center of the character. The
					underlying essence of the story will come to the surface in surprising
					ways, after all the externals have been stripped away.

A plot treatment can carry the essence of the story, which
					may end up being quite different from the story the writer first
					envisioned. When she was writing her second novel, Lamott thought
					she had a clear understanding of the climax. She had been working
					for two years and had spent most of her advance when her editor
					wrote her a polite letter advising her to abandon the novel entirely. Instead,
					Lamott devoted more time to the project and entirely reconstructed
					the novel. When she felt she had succeeded, she triumphantly sent
					the revised novel to her editor and wrote a note saying she was
					coming for a consultation. 

Her editor felt that the novel still didn’t work. Lamott
					was crushed and insisted on visiting the editor at his home to make
					a final plea. At his house, she passionately described the point
					of the novel, the characters’ relationships, and the hidden themes
					of her story. The editor told her to go off and write a plot treatment
					(i.e., a description of the plot) of the story in her head, rather
					than the story she had handed to her editor. 

Lamott’s students often want to see the plot treatment
					described in this story. When they do, they pore over it in the
					hopes of uncovering a magic formula, which doesn’t happen. Still,
					plot treatments can be a guide to what is truly important in a novel.
					When students ask how they will know when their novel is done, Lamott
					says finishing a novel is like putting an octopus under a bed. Tentacles
					keep reaching out, but eventually the writer just doesn’t have any
					more energy to wrestle with it.

In this section, Lamott addresses the idea that writing
					can lead to a heightened sense of community. In the chapter called
					“Set Design,” for example, she advises writers who need to do research
					to reach out to people rather than the Internet or the library.
					Her picture of writers chatting to experts on the phone directly
					contradicts the stereotype of the lonely, isolated writer scribbling
					at his desk. 

Lamott discusses her phone conversations with a gardener,
					her visits to nursing homes, and her discussions with her New York
					editor. Each interaction provides her with material for her writing
					and teaches her lessons about life—which also turn out to be lessons about
					writing. Although she has previously described the writer as a strange
					and unusual creature, Lamott suggests in this section that writers
					can also find a place in the community and connection with other
					people.

Lamott’s interaction with her New York editor saves the
					novel she is working on. Her trip to his house is depicted as an
					act of desperation. Through a combination of liquor and frustration,
					she eventually lands on her editor’s doorstep. Lamott struggles
					to explain to him the essence of her book and succeeds, coming up
					with a captivating plot treatment as she speaks. But her editor
					tells her that the plot she described out loud is far different
					from what she put on the page. 

In this section, Lamott continues to emphasize the mysticism
					of writing rather than the mechanics. She suggests that she found
					the heart of her novel through emotion and desperation, not through following
					certain steps or sticking to a rigid routine.

Lamott explains her views on death and dying by describing
					her visits to the nursing home. She introduced the subject of death
					earlier in the book when she described her father’s struggle with
					brain cancer, but here she explores the subject in greater detail.
					Her descriptions of the nursing home are both disturbing and touching. The
					descriptions also emphasize her willingness to turn the tragedy of
					dying into lessons on writing. Lamott describes her friend Pam, who
					is ill with cancer, as wise, perhaps because she understands life better
					in the face of death. 

