[Arthur] was hoping to weather the trouble
						by refusing to become conscious of it.

Arthur, back from France, realizes that something is wrong
					at Camelot. One day, he brings up the subject of Guenever with Lancelot, but
					it is an awkward moment, and the affair is not directly addressed.
					Lancelot then bumps into Guenever, who tells him Elaine is on her
					way. Guenever seems to be on the verge of reconciling herself with
					Lancelot, but she then tears herself away from him, saying that
					she does not want to stand in his way if he discovers that he wishes
					to marry Elaine.

Guenever cordially welcomes Elaine, who brings Galahad,
					though some hostility is evident. Lancelot avoids Elaine and Galahad
					until Guenever orders him to go to them. Guenever adds, however,
					that Lancelot is not to sleep with Elaine. Lancelot says he has
					no intention of doing so. He is fascinated by the sight of his son,
					but when Elaine tries to embrace Lancelot, Lancelot rushes out of
					the room.

The next day, Lancelot and Elaine are summoned to Guenever’s chamber.
					Lancelot goes happily, remembering how he was summoned the night
					before to Guenever’s room, where they spent the night together.
					Guenever, however, is furious, and she accuses Lancelot of sleeping
					with Elaine. Elaine defends Lancelot, saying that she thought he
					was sleeping with Guenever, and Lancelot realizes that he has been
					tricked once again. Guenever refuses to believe Elaine’s story. Lancelot
					suddenly jumps out the window and flees the castle. Elaine bitterly
					accuses Guenever of having driven Lancelot mad. 

Two years later, King Pelles’s friend Sir Bliant tells
					him of a wild man he once encountered, who he thinks may have been
					Lancelot. The wild man was naked, but spoke in the high tongue and
					was so good with a sword that he managed to knock out Sir Bliant,
					who was in armor. The wild man then ran to Sir Bliant’s tent, jumped
					into his bed, and fell asleep. While the wild man was sleeping,
					Sir Bliant brought him to his castle. A year and a half after that
					first encounter, Sir Bliant was attacked by two evil knights, one
					of whom was Sir Bruce Sans Pitié. The wild man saw this attack from
					his window, broke his handcuffs, and saved Sir Bliant. Sir Bliant
					and Pelles speculate that it may have been Lancelot.

Soon after, a wild man comes to Pelles’s castle. Pelles
					asks the wild man if he is Lancelot, but all the man does is roar.
					Pelles tells his servants to give the wild man the clothes of a
					fool and keep him locked in the stable. One night, Pelles gets drunk
					and gives the wild man his cloak. In this royal clothing, the wild
					man looks brave and noble, and the servants make a path for him
					as he walks out.

This sudden mingling of Lancelot’s worlds—his relationship
					with Elaine and his relationship with Guenever—turns out to have
					disastrous results for Lancelot’s psyche. Now that questing and
					chivalry have been contaminated for him, Lancelot has nowhere to
					hide from Guenever, with the result being that he goes insane. Lancelot, who
					is admittedly a little slow to learn, is tricked for a second time and
					finds that what he thought of as a reconciliation in fact serves
					to drive him and his love apart. He cannot, however, simply rush
					out on a series of quests, as he does earlier; his first encounter
					with Elaine has taught him that even adventures and questing can
					be soured by love. When Guenever turns on Lancelot, therefore, he
					is defenseless, unable to derive pleasure from the questing that
					earlier brings him comfort, or at least distraction. Without any
					way of escaping the pain he feels from Guenever’s rage, Lancelot
					becomes insane from the strain.

Arthur’s goodness in these chapters comes under close
					scrutiny, and we begin to wonder if his ignorance can sometimes
					be harmful. This is the case in Chapter 16,
					when Arthur fails to talk to Lancelot about Lancelot’s affair with
					Guenever, avoiding the sort of honest confrontation that the issue
					so desperately needs. Arthur knows about the affair, but he is so
					dogmatic about the power of justice and goodwill that he remains
					purposefully blind to the issues that eventually tear his kingdom
					apart. But by abiding so rigidly to his principles, Arthur also
					violates his own laws. Just as Guenever and Lancelot are
					breaking the rules of honor, Arthur also cannot bear to follow the
					demands of his own laws, which would require that he punish them
					for their transgressions. By trying to be noble and selfless, Arthur and
					Lancelot enter, in a sense, a pact of dishonesty, by which they
					try to preserve Camelot with lies rather than with friendship.

