After returning to California, Mortenson visits the storage unit in Berkeley
					where he has kept all his possessions. He picks up a stuffed animal and is carried
					away into thoughts of his past life. We learn that he was born in Minnesota, but his
					father wanted to see the world and make a difference, so the family moved to
					Tanzania, Africa, when he was three months old. He has fond memories of growing up
					there while his father built Tanzania’s first teaching hospital and his mother
					started a school. Mortenson thinks about Christa’s early illness and the graceful
					way she faced her hardships. The family returned to America when Mortenson was
					fourteen, and although he experienced some difficulties at first, he was comfortable
					with the multicultural environment of his high school and became a star athlete.
					There was little money in the family, so Mortenson joined the Army. 

After two years in the service, during which he was stationed in Germany, he
					attended college on the GI bill and attained degrees in nursing and chemistry.
					Following his father’s death from cancer, Mortenson moved to California and soon
					took up climbing. He rapidly became an expert, learning all he could about the
					history of mountaineering. Christa visited him every year, and he went on several
					climbing expeditions. In 1992, he was injured in a fall on Mt. Sill, at nearly the
					same time that Christa died during a seizure. The following year, Mortenson was
					invited to serve as medic on a K2 expedition and made his plan to honor Christa with
					the climb. The chapter ends with Mortenson’s mind returning to the present,
					wondering how he will now fulfill his promise to Korphe.

Mortenson begins trying to raise funds, but he has no experience with
					fund-raising and no knowledge of computers. He starts by writing letters to famous
					people, explaining his project and asking for donations. Fortunately, he meets a
					Pakistani man who owns a computer store and teaches Mortenson how to type his
					letters on a word processor. Mortenson sends out 580 letters and makes sixteen grant
					applications but receives only one contribution: a $100 check from television news
					anchor Tom Brokaw. Mortenson’s mother, now a school principal, sends more than $600
					collected by her students. During this time, Mortenson is working as an emergency
					room nurse and he begins a relationship with Marina Villard, an attractive resident
					who shares his interest in climbing. He enjoys spending time with her and her two
					daughters, but since he is living in his car and saving all his money for a return
					to Pakistan, problems arise in the relationship. Mortenson also becomes friends with
					another ER physician and climber, Tom Vaughan. Vaughan writes a small article about
					Mortenson’s project for a mountaineering journal and receives a note from wealthy
					scientist Jean Hoerni. Hoerni agrees to provide $12,000, the amount Mortenson
					estimates the school will cost. After selling all his belongings to pay his own
					expenses, Mortenson leaves for Pakistan. 

Relin begins the section with a common literary device: using sensory details,
					such as sight and smell, to trigger a character’s memories. Relin describes
					Mortenson’s emotional response to the sight of his stored belongings and the smell
					of a stuffed animal. The experience triggers a flood of memories, and the narrative
					shifts abruptly into the past, allowing Relin to tell the whole story of Mortenson’s
					life up to that time and connect Mortenson’s past experieces with his present
					situation. We see that Mortenson’s family and upbringing provided many examples of
					service to others and that he watched his parents start and complete ambitious
					projects. We also notice that Mortenson himself is divided between his sense of
					responsibility (exemplified in his care for Christa and devotion to his father) and
					his desire to live an unrestricted life of adventure. These two aspects of his life
					collide when he takes a serious fall during a climb at the same time his sister is
					dying. Relin dramatizes this turning point with a detailed description of
					Mortenson’s fall and a startling visual image of Christa’s body, found stiff on
					hands and knees. 

Chapters 4 and 5 reveal that while Mortenson is a good person, he can still be
					very immature. He focuses much of his attention on physical accomplishments and
					tends to become obsessed with his interests. For example, he not only spends much of
					his time mastering the skills of climbing, but also collects hundreds of books on
					the subject and spends most of his money on equipment and trips. Although he takes
					up a profession that involves serving others, he works only enough to support his
					climbing activities. He does experience a personal turning point in Korphe and makes
					a commitment to help the people there, but even this worthy objective is, in many
					ways, just another new obsession. He neglects his family-like relationship with
					Marina and her daughters to focus his life on getting back to Pakistan. Mortenson is
					also still sleeping in his car at age 36. Even though he now has a goal, his life at
					this point has not changed significantly from what it was before his experience in
					Korphe.

We also see that mountaineering has symbolic value for Mortenson. It
					represents an escape from ordinary life as well as signifying achievement. We learn
					that Mortenson felt attracted to Mount Kilimanjaro from an early age, but when he
					finally persuaded his father to let him climb the mountain, he became sick on the
					way up. Only when he stood on the summit did he experience the thrill he was
					seeking, and it appears that during his life after that, he constantly tried to
					recapture those mingled feelings of freedom and success. Beyond pursuing the
					activity of climbing, Mortenson wants to know everything he can about the history of
					human interaction with mountains. In these chapters we learn more about the climbing
					community and the importance it will have for Mortenson’s project. In particular, we
					hear about Sir Edmond Hillary’s Everest expedition and his project to build schools
					in Nepal, foreshadowing and inspiring Mortenson’s impulsive promise in Korphe. 

Lastly, these chapters mark the introduction of Jean Hoerni, the first
					character in the book whose personality is developed in the narrative. Prior to this
					point, the characters have generally been outlined for the reader rather than
					depicted thoroughly. For example, we hear about Mortenson’s family and climbing
					associates from the narrator rather than observing their actions and interactions.
					They are mainly presented as people who influenced Mortenson’s life rather than as
					individual personalities. Even the Balti characters, Haji and Mouzafer, are depicted
					only through a few actions and comments. Yet everyone we meet is pleasant and
					helpful, so it is a surprise to the reader when Hoerni turns out to be such an
					eccentric, sharp-tongued character. His attitude obviously intimidates and confuses
					Mortenson, reinforcing our view of Mortenson as somewhat immature and naïve. When
					Hoerni cautions Mortenson not to “screw up,” we realize that Mortenson’s own nature
					may be an obstacle to the success of his project.

