Chapter Five: The Voice of Reason 

Nenneke finds Geralt in the library to tell him that he has a guest. The guest is his friend Dandelion, who Nenneke describes as a parasite and an idler, among other insults. Geralt reminds her that he’s a famous poet and Nenneke does not believe that his ability to go from lyricism to obscenities is a talent. Dandelion enters the room while playing the lute. He gives an exaggerated bow to Nenneke and calls her a venerable mother. Nenneke tells him not to call her that as the idea that he could be her son horrifies her. Nenneke leaves and Dandelion explains that she caught him flirting with the gatekeeper, a priestess of Melitele. When Geralt asks him what he’s doing at the temple, Dandelion explains that he heard about Geralt’s fight with the striga in Wyzim and came to see him. They drink and talk about books while sitting in the library. 

Dandelion offers to travel with Geralt and Geralt tells him he plans to leave the area because of his encounter with Falwick and Tailles. Dandelion tells him he shouldn’t worry because Hereward wouldn’t dare move against Nenneke or the cult of Melitele. When Dandelion tells Geralt that he has heard many rumors about monstrous beings in the area, Geralt tells him that most are untrue. Geralt expresses disappointment that the world is changing and he feels as though something is ending. He worries he won’t be able to support himself as a witcher for much longer. Dandelion teases Geralt for being overly serious and blames the book he is reading for giving him such ideas. Geralt tells him two stories as an example of what is ending. The first is about a town that refused to let him kill a troll because it fixes the bridge it hides under and the town alderman insists that it is cheaper to pay the troll’s tolls than to hire someone else to fix the bridge. The second is about how peasants wouldn’t let him kill a forktail dragon because it’s their baron’s daughter’s favorite dragon and they say the baron will burn their hamlet if it comes to harm.  

Dandelion advises him that he should consider a change of profession and even suggests that he would make a good priest. Dandelion points out that the witchers are putting themselves out of work by doing their jobs well. He argues that as they rid the world of monsters, there are fewer left for them to defeat. He reminds Geralt that the goal of the witchers is to create a world without monsters. Dandelion ruminates on how witchers have changed the lives of the people in their land because it was once ruled by dragons, griffons, vampires, and a number of other monsters. He states that humans were the invaders and that witchers helped make the land safe for them to live in. Dandelion tells Geralt that he will feel better when he kills a couple of monsters, so they should travel south to the wilder countries there. The proposition reminds them both of their first adventure together in a place Dandelion refers to as the edge of the world.  

“Chapter Five: The Voice of Reason” introduces a major character to the book, Dandelion, who is very different from Geralt and acts as his foil. Dandelion has been mentioned before this point, but this is the first time he appears in person, and he is immediately established as important to Geralt. He seems to be Geralt’s closest friend and has some history with Nenneke, who hates him for his vulgarity. One of the ways that Dandelion contrasts with Geralt is in appearance. Dandelion wears a bright, showy outfit, including a lilac jerkin, lace cuffs, and a heron feather pinned to his hat, while Geralt always wears black. Similarly, Dandelion’s wordy and grand style of speaking is much different than Geralt’s straightforward conversational style. Though their interaction is limited in this chapter, these differences are strong enough to suggest that Dandelion’s role is to bring attention to certain aspects of Geralt.  

Geralt believes that his way of life might be ending based on his recent experiences. He worries that people’s attitudes toward monsters are changing and becoming more accepting. This means that he could lose his income and, more importantly, his status. While there are many  reasons why people choose to let monsters live, Geralt’s concern is that people have learned to coexist with certain types of monsters. Dandelion believes Geralt is worried that witchers will become obsolete, but Dandelion focuses on the financial implications of this change. Geralt is more concerned about his identity, which is strongly tied to being a witcher. Geralt’s entire sense of self comes from being a witcher. It is a physical part of his being, but Dandelion doesn’t recognize this. He offers Geralt what he thinks is practical advice, suggesting he switch professions and become a priest. While this approach might work for a person like Dandelion, it won’t help Geralt. The suggestion to become a priest is even more absurd considering Geralt’s lack of religious faith. Besides, being a witcher is more to Geralt than a job. He was chosen to be a witcher and it is something that has been built into his body by the process he underwent at Kaer Morhen. Dandelion cannot understand that Geralt is facing an existential crisis that threatens his very self. 

Like Nenneke, Dandelion can see that there is something wrong with Geralt, but he cannot understand it. Dandelion believes Geralt is depressed, but he cannot understand the depth of Geralt’s feelings. As a troubadour and poet, Dandelion enjoys a relatively simple life. He avoids philosophical topics and focuses on life’s immediate pleasures, so he believes problems have simple solutions. By contrast, Nenneke senses that Geralt’s problem is complicated and serious. As a priestess, her identity is strongly tied to the cult and temple. However, if those things disappeared, she would still be able to practice her faith and work as a healer. Geralt’s faithlessness cannot offer him stability, strength, and comfort as the world around him changes. Even though Dandelion doesn’t recognize the seriousness of Geralt’s problem, his concern supports Nenneke’s theory that something is wrong with Geralt. The fact that Nenneke and Dandelion cannot fully understand Geralt highlights how lonely and different witchers are from other types of people.  

While only a small element of the chapter, the fact that Geralt has a jug of alcohol hidden away in the library shows just how familiar he is with the temple of Melitele. This suggests that he has spent a considerable amount of time there and planned to return. This new detail demonstrates that Geralt is at home in the temple and that he feels secure enough to hide a secret indulgence away somewhere he knows others won’t find it or tamper with it. It also allows Geralt to host Dandelion the way he pleases. This detail shows how comfortable Geralt is at the temple, which acts as his home base as he travels around the area.

