A young girl from Kansas and the protagonist of the novel. Dorothy is brave, kind, and determined to return home after she is uprooted from it. Despite being the protagonist of the novel, Dorothy does not change much throughout her adventures.

A magical scarecrow from Oz. The Scarecrow is one of Dorothy’s companions on her quest, and he is loyal to Dorothy and helps her while working toward his own goal of getting a brain. Cheerful and easy-going, the Scarecrow has more intelligence than he realizes. He eventually becomes ruler of the Emerald City when the Wizard leaves in his balloon.

A once-human man whose body has been completely replaced by tin. One of Dorothy’s companions on her quest, the Tin Woodman hopes to receive a new heart from the Wizard of Oz, although he shows himself to be kind and concerned for others already. The Tin Woodman eventually becomes ruler of the Winkies.

A fierce-seeming lion who is actually frightened of conflict. One of Dorothy’s companions on her quest, the Lion hopes that the Wizard will give him courage, although he repeatedly shows instances of bravery to help his companions. The Lion eventually becomes ruler over the beasts of the southern forest.

The object of Dorothy and her companions’ quest. The Wizard is a seemingly powerful man who lives in the Emerald City. However, he proves to be a fraud who cannot really help Dorothy or her friends.

An evil witch and one of the main antagonists of the story. The Wicked Witch has enslaved the Winkies and takes Dorothy and the Lion as prisoners after having the flying monkeys incapacitate the Tin Woodman and the Scarecrow. Dorothy and her companions are sent by the Wizard of Oz to kill her. The Wicked Witch severely underestimates Dorothy’s courage and power and pays for it with her life.

A small black dog that helped keep Dorothy cheerful in Kansas, and one of her companions on her quest. Toto and Dorothy are very protective of one another. He returns with Dorothy to Kansas at the end of the novel.

The Good Witch of the South who lives in the country of the Quadlings. She tells Dorothy about the power of the Silver Shoes to take her home. Unlike the other supposedly powerful characters in Oz, Glinda is wise and has compassion for Dorothy.

A group of mischievous monkeys who must perform three acts for the owner of the Golden Cap. Although first under the power of the Wicked Witch of the West, they are not actually evil. They later help Dorothy and her companions. 

A farmer’s wife and Dorothy’s aunt. Although worn down by the grayness of the Kansas prairie, she loves and cares for Dorothy. Returning to her is one of Dorothy’s main desires in her travels in the land of Oz.

