James meets with the facility’s attorney, his parents,
					and Daniel. James learns that the charges in Michigan and North
					Carolina are minimal and that he’ll only have to pay a fine. In
					Ohio, the charges are more serious, and James is facing three years
					in state prison. James says he won’t go to trial, because he is
					guilty of all the charges against him. James hugs his mother for
					the first time in his life. They separate, and he goes to lunch.
					He remembers last night’s conversation with Lilly, in which he told
					her he’d be willing to move to Chicago to be near her. James has
					lunch with his friends, who offer words of encouragement. James
					notices Bobby sitting with the man who is familiar to James, but
					whom he cannot place.

James goes back to meet with his parents. He tells them
					a little about his friends and about Lilly, whom he says he loves.
					His father says to tell Lilly they said hello. At another meeting
					with other addicts and family members, but not his own, James learns
					the conventional knowledge that addiction is a genetic disease and
					that it is incurable. He doesn’t believe it, choosing instead to
					label it a decision. Back at the unit the Bald Man is graduating.
					He cries again, but this time he gets a standing ovation. James
					goes to call his brother and some friends. One of his friends has
					been drinking. He calls three of his friends who are also friends
					with the Girl with the Arctic Eyes. Back in the dining hall, James
					spots Lilly, who stares at him angrily and looks like she’s been
					crying. He tries to find out why by gesturing at her, but she doesn’t
					say anything.

He goes to dinner. Ed is leaving the next day. He is eager
					to see his four sons. James goes back for another family meeting,
					in which he tells his parents about the Fury, noting that it seems
					to get worse whenever he’s around them. His mother and father reveal
					that James’s grandfather was an alcoholic and that James had a horrible ear
					infection when he was a baby that went unnoticed and unchecked until
					he was two. He had to have operations until he was twelve to fix
					the problem. James refuses to blame his current condition on his
					past and says that he must take responsibility for what he does
					and what he’s become. They part with a hug and James goes back to
					his room.

James and his parents reach several milestones in this
					section, but probably the most important is James’s willingness
					to initiate physical contact with them. He says he can feel the
					Fury rising but quells it. James is learning that instant gratification
					is perhaps not a part of the solution. He also feels a small sense
					of joy when he initiates contact with his parents. He seems almost
					surprised to discover that this act creates an immediate sense of
					family. The entire time he was looking for something, it was right
					there all along. All he had to do was give in a little and accept
					some help from those who were closest to him. Another important
					step is James’s decision not to hide his friends and his girlfriend
					from his parents. He makes a conscious effort to disclose everything
					about his current life, telling them that his best friend is some
					sort of mobster, that his other friends are crackheads and drunks,
					and that his girlfriend is a pill-popper and former prostitute.
					He finds that his parents are most concerned with whether his friends
					are nice people and whether he loves his girlfriend. This knowledge
					is refreshing, and it gives James the capability to be more honest
					with them as time goes on and as they begin to mine the important
					parts of his life.

When faced with the reality of state prison, James realizes
					that there can be no more running. He is finally aware that he must
					take responsibility for his actions. The disclosure that James’s
					grandfather was an alcoholic and that his first two years were completely consumed
					with a horrible ear infection (explaining why his first memories
					are of anger and pain) is a true test of whether James can take
					responsibility for himself. He notes that these two explanations are
					viable enough to allow him to absolve himself of the past twenty-three
					years of pain and damage. But in the end, James chooses to believe
					that he is responsible for his own actions.

The Bald Man’s graduation marks a pinnacle in the maturity
					of James Frey. At past graduations, he has been indifferent, cynical,
					or sad, but at this graduation he is visibly moved. He feels chills
					up his back, and he feels hope for the first time. Lilly’s anger
					at James is cause for concern, certainly. But that doesn’t seem
					to dampen his deep sense of contentedness. This chapter of James’s
					life closes with him realizing ultimately that the act of drawing
					strength from others and acting as a possible source of strength
					is the most effective form of killing the Fury.

