When Richie Perry first arrives in Vietnam, seventeen
				years old and fresh out of high school, he is naïve, lost, and confused.
				He has no grasp on the brutal reality of war, no sense of himself,
				and no idea of how he wants to build his life. Though he is unusually
				bright, sensitive, and talented, all of his big dreams—attending
				college, becoming a writer, giving his brother, Kenny, the opportunities
				Richie lacked—seem doomed by his poverty. Richie’s father abandoned
				the family years before, leaving the two boys with a depressed and
				alcoholic mother who spends most of her measly salary on her drinking habit.
				Richie sees joining the army as his only chance at escape, a way
				to avoid unsettling questions about himself and his future.

At first, Richie’s experience in Vietnam makes him only
				more doubtful and confused. The carnage, senseless murders, and
				completely antiheroic nature of the battlefield leave him reeling,
				adding to his doubts about right and wrong and the morality of the
				war. Richie struggles with these difficult issues but never finds
				satisfactory answers. He begins to mature without realizing it and
				starts to become “the man [he will] be” by asking these complicated
				questions. Richie’s sensitivity and inherent curiosity compel him
				to reflect on these issues of right and wrong, and also make him
				the squad’s unofficial therapist. He is the friend to whom every
				soldier in the squad turns when in need of advice or a sympathetic
				ear. Richie’s urgent reactions to his battlefield experiences give
				him the perspective and insight to become a writer, as they instill
				in him a compelling need to represent the truth in words, regardless
				of whether the truth is disturbing or uncomfortable. Returning home after
				several months of combat, Richie is no closer to solving the problems
				that plagued him when he left. He is still too poor to attend college
				and has no means to improve his brother’s life, but he has grown
				from his experiences and started on the path to manhood and emotional
				maturity.

