Oliver Marks 

The book’s primary narrator and the story’s protagonist. Oliver is one of the seven fourth-year acting students, known for being agreeable and difficult to cast. Oliver is often assigned the role of sidekick to the hero. Oliver becomes romantically involved with Meredith while having complicated feelings for his best friend and roommate, James. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Oliver Marks

Richard Stirling 

The book’s primary antagonist and one of the seven fourth-year acting students. Richard is Wren Stirling’s cousin. Physically imposing and handsome with a deep, resonant voice, he is comfortable in domineering roles. Richard bullies and menaces his peers, especially James. Richard haunts his peers after his death. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Richard Stirling

James Farrow 

Oliver’s best friend and roommate. James is the most handsome and studious of the fourth-year acting students. He is often cast as the hero but wants more diverse acting roles. Hounded by Richard, James becomes increasingly distraught as the novel progresses. James is sometimes portrayed as jealous of Meredith and Oliver’s relationship. 

Read an in-depth analysis of James Farrow

Meredith Dardenne 

Richard’s girlfriend and fellow fourth-year acting student. Red-headed Meredith is the most strikingly beautiful and sexually desirable of the group of seven actors. She is often physically objectified, something she both resents and exploits. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Meredith Dardenne

Filippa (Pip) Kosta 

The most loyal of the fourth-year students. Filippa is grounded and clear-headed and is often the peacekeeper in the group. Filippa becomes romantically involved with Camilo after she graduates from Dellecher. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Filippa Kosta

Alexander Vass 

The most reckless of the group of seven actors and the one most likely to use drugs and alcohol. Alexander’s response to Richard’s death and other stressors often makes him appear callous and self-serving. Alexander is romantically involved with Colin. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Alexander Vass

Wren Stirling 

Richard Stirling’s cousin and peer actor. Petite and blonde with an innocent disposition, Wren is often cast as an ingenue at Dellecher. Fragile Wren suffers bitterly following her cousin’s death. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Wren Stirling

Joseph Colborne 

The detective assigned to the murder investigation. Colborne visits Oliver regularly in prison because he does not believe he is responsible for Richard’s death. He quits the police force before the start of the novel and uses this information to convince Oliver to tell him the truth about what happened.  

Frederick Teasdale 

One of the teachers responsible for the acting program at Dellecher. Frederick helps the students understand the cultural context and the drama of the plays they perform. Frederick also directs the plays alongside Gwendolyn. His approach to teaching and directing is encouraging and nurturing. 

Gwendolyn Oswald 

An eccentric, aging hippie and the other teacher and director. Her focus is on the craft of acting, which she believes relies on vulnerability and a certain degree of fear. 

Camilo (Milo) Verela 

A young, Chilean fight choreographer, personal trainer, and movement coach for acting students at Dellecher. Camilo also acts with the fourth years in their final production. After Oliver is released from prison, it is revealed that Camilo and Filippa are in a romantic relationship. 

Colin Hyland 

A talented third-year drama student at Dellecher and Alexander’s love interest. Colin is one of the only younger students to be named in the novel and frequently interacts with the fourth-year cohort. 

Dean Holinshed 

Dean at the exclusive Dellecher Classical Conservatory. Holinshed is responsible for the students. 

Caroline Marks 

Oliver’s younger sister. Caroline and Oliver do not get along. Caroline is sent to an expensive recovery center for treatment for anorexia. 

Leah Marks 

Oliver’s amicable youngest sister. Leah and Oliver get along well. Leah stays in touch with Oliver throughout his incarceration. 

Caleb Dardenne 

Meredith’s older brother and the only family member she sees when she visits New York for holidays. Approaching his 30s, Caleb likes to party. 

Allan Boyd 

A cellist who flirts with Meredith and is physically beaten by Richard. Allan remains unnamed until the police arrive to investigate Richard’s death, suggesting his relative unimportance to the main characters. 

Ned Walton 

A detective who works with Colborne throughout the investigation. 

