In an effort to be observant and open to ideas, Lamott
					carries index cards. She carries them everywhere, not only to record
					events but also to remind herself to pay attention to the world
					around her, both as a writer and as a human being. She relates a
					story with her dying friend, Pam. Pam was watching her young daughter
					play, and she was struggling to find the silver lining in her situation.
					Lamott offered, “The silver lining is that you’re not going to have
					to see any more naked pictures of Demi Moore.” She quickly jotted
					down the words “Pammy, Demi Moore” on an index card. Lamott stated
					that many writers do fine without lists and index cards, but that
					she would feel lost without them. Many small but important moments would
					have been lost or forgotten if not for her index cards.

Lamott says that once you truly start looking at the world through
					the lens of a writer, you can begin to see nearly everything as “material.”
					The index cards record these thoughts and moments. Lamott admits
					that she is disorganized, and that she has far more index cards
					than she knows what to do with. But every time she feels lost in
					a project or stumped, she reviews her index cards and they invariably
					jog her memory. She recalls how a woman’s perfume reminded her of
					the lemonade her aunt made while she was going through a divorce.
					She used a lemonade maker and forgot to add the sugar, but everyone
					was so desperate for a happy moment that they happily drank it and
					pretended that it was wonderful. She also remembers how, one night,
					Sam inhaled deeply and said the night “smelled like the moon.” This
					memory was also transcribed on an index card. Lamott admits that
					she throws out many of her index cards, but that the ones that remain
					will be a kind of piecemeal inheritance for Sam. In a way, her index
					cards hold her memories, as well as her writing inspirations.

The act of researching by calling experts makes the process
					of writing more communal. Whenever there is something the writer doesn’t
					know, it’s important to remember that there are many people who
					do possess the information that the writer needs. Calling around
					can be the writer’s break. Here Lamott aligns writing and raising
					children: every day a child needs both discipline and a break. Through
					the act of research, the writer can connect with interesting people,
					and these connections might inspire new writing. Lamott relates
					a time when she was writing about a man opening a bottle of champagne,
					but she didn’t know what the wire thing around the bottleneck was
					called. She called a local winery, and as she was being connected
					to someone who would know about it, she began to envision the beauty
					of the vineyards, and their glowing, translucent grapes. Eventually,
					she reached someone who was able to tell her that the “wire thing”
					was called the wire hood. From this, Lamott was
					able to find some useful information, as well as inspiration to write
					a beautiful scene; additionally, she received heartfelt thanks from
					her readers for finally answering the question of what that “wire
					thing” is called.

Lamott states that while the writer might initially be
					enamored of the writing process, eventually most writers will want
					feedback. For this, there are writer conferences and writer groups.
					Many writers join writing groups or classes to get feedback, to
					learn from and offer support to others, to share disappointments
					and stories about the writing life, or simply to connect with other
					writers. Some beginning writers secretly hope that Lamott will instantly
					fall in love with their work and recommend it for publication. This
					very rarely, if ever, happens. In general, Lamott supports and encourages
					writers, as well as provides advice. Writers can help one another
					and provide a supportive community of constructive criticism and
					emotional guidance. However, it can be hard to have others read
					and critique your work—especially since some people will feel compelled
					to be destructive.

Lamott recalls one such incident during a writing class.
					A beginning writer had submitted an experimental piece that was
					quite weak. Some of the writers tried to point out what was working
					and what wasn’t, and how the author could improve. Suddenly, one
					student shouted that she felt the story was awful and no one was
					being honest with the author. Though this was largely true, it was
					very hurtful and the class anxiously awaited Lamott’s reaction.
					She told the author of the story that it was better to try something
					difficult, even if it didn’t quite work, and that he should work
					on it a little more and then move on. She also commended the critic
					for speaking up, but later told her, “You don’t always have to chop
					with the sword of truth. You can point with it, too.” When writers
					ask about how to create a writer’s group, Lamott states that there
					are a variety of ways, but reminds questioners that writer’s groups
					are not just about getting published, but also about supporting
					each other. She recalls one instance when a depressed writer was
					reinvigorated by the trials of another writer from her group and
					began working on her book again.

The chapter on index cards is one of the few chapters
					in which Lamott straightforwardly discusses the mechanics of writing,
					and yet it is also a chapter in which memories feature prominently.
					Lamott states that she uses index cards as a tool to record details
					and story ideas. However, the examples she gives prove that the
					index cards have a larger significance as a way of memorializing
					important moments in one’s life. For example, the simple note “Pammy,
					Demi Moore,” has less importance as a possible story line than it
					has as a precious memory of an afternoon with Pam. Lamott’s statement that
					the index cards will be Sam’s inheritance touches on the idea of using
					your writing as a gift to others. She revisits this theme in later chapters.
					Once again, writing mingles with real life, and the tools for one
					world prove as useful for the other.

Here, Lamott continues to discuss the importance of community. In
					the chapter “Calling Around,” she reiterates her belief that writing
					can foster community. But she is upfront about the isolation that writers
					often experience. This is one of the inherent contradictions in
					the life of a writer: to write successfully, one must have a broad knowledge
					of human nature, yet the actual writing process requires one to
					spend lots of time alone. Establishing a community of fellow writers
					can be helpful, but writers must be as careful in selecting this community
					as they are in selecting friends or lovers. 

Lamott clearly favors critics who are honest yet tactful.
					During the infamous confrontation in one of her workshops, Lamott praises
					the harsh critic for her honesty but chastises her for her bluntness.
					This incident shows the risk that writers face when they share their
					work with others. This theme persists throughout Bird by
						Bird. 

Lamott uses her experiences with writers’ conferences
					and writers’ groups to highlight the differences between writing
					and publishing. Getting published should not be the primary objective
					of writing. She tells her students that they will be happier and
					more successful if they treat publishing as a secondary goal. She
					cites a group of former students who formed a loyal and devoted
					writers’ group as an example. Though very few of the members have
					been published, their group provides solace, comfort, and incentive
					to keep writing.

Lamott recommends that every writer find a trusted friend
					to read her or his first drafts. Lamott herself has two friends
					with whom she shares her work; one is a writer and one is not. Upon
					completing a manuscript, Lamott rushes them a copy via Federal Express
					because she is so anxious about their response. In spite of her
					worrying, her friends usually provide positive feedback, along with
					constructive criticism. As she listens to their suggestions, Lamott
					often wants to defend her work or be angry at them. But ultimately
					she is grateful for these friends and truly values their feedback.

When someone doesn’t know what to write about, Lamott
					suggests writing about one’s own life. This exercise often unlocks
					valuable memories and feelings. An editor once commissioned Lamott to
					write an essay on the San Francisco Giants, and Lamott was initially
					stumped. She began by writing a letter to Sam about her memories
					of watching the Giants, and of individual games and particular players.
					Her love of baseball was a result of the basic human drive to be
					part of a community. Eventually, a captivating story emerged from
					this letter.

Lamott then addresses the horrible—yet inevitable—curse
					of writer’s block. She refuses to think of the problem as a block;
					rather, she prefers to think of it as a problem that can be conquered
					by changing one’s approach to writing. She counsels the writer not
					to force a particular story but to simply write three hundred words
					a day on any topic. By continuing to write, the writer will soon
					pass through this period of emptiness. 

A central theme of Bird by Bird is the
					advantage of confronting the ugliness in the world and oneself,
					rather than avoiding it. This theme is illuminated in Lamott’s references
					to illness and dying, but it is also present in this section, as
					she discusses the love-hate relationship she has with the two friends
					who read her drafts. Choosing these friends, as she says, is as
					important as choosing a mate, because the act of sharing one’s writing
					is an intimate, often painful process. Lamott praises her friends
					but also admits to having vicious, irrational thoughts when they
					give her the very feedback that she has requested. She readily admits
					these negative feelings. Here Lamott’s open and honest narrative
					style reinforces the fact that she is a trustworthy narrator. 

Lamott compares story writing to taking photographs or
					writing letters. She revisits this theme in recalling her commission
					to write about the San Francisco Giants. Initially, she is stumped,
					but once she starts thinking about childhood memories, a story develops
					like a Polaroid. Lamott also advises her students to write letters
					in order to delve into their own memories. These memories are an
					endless source of fodder for writing, and the act of letter-writing
					is also an act of communication. For Lamott, good writing is inherently
					an act of sharing experiences with others.

In “Writers’ Block,” Lamott once again counsels a mixture
					of creative thinking and faith. Her approach to writing emphasizes immersing
					oneself in one’s life. She interprets writer’s block as a sign that
					the writer needs to back away from intense, rigorous writing and
					start living his life. Lamott has no practical answers for writer’s block;
					in essence, she counsels waiting until inspiration strikes. However,
					she insists that the writer continue to write three hundred words
					a day. She advises writing about the past and childhood memories—where
					she often finds inspiration—but stresses that writing on any topic
					is better than not writing at all. This combination of creative
					activity and patient faith is Lamott’s solution to many of life’s
					obstacles.

Here Lamott describes the inspiration for Bird
						by Bird in greater detail. For her, writing is often the
					process of creating a present for someone she cares deeply about.
					Her first novel was intended as a present to her father, who died
					of brain cancer. The novel depicted a dysfunctional family dealing
					with the same issue; her book shows the family’s sadness, but also
					the uncomfortable and blackly humorous side of the issue. When Pammy
					is dying of cancer, Lamott finds herself typing up journal entries
					and compiling them into a book to honor her friend. Finally, in
					order to speak to single mothers, Lamott writes about her experience
					during the first year of Sam’s life. All three books were motivated
					by an effort to show the good and bad feelings that go along with
					loss, friendship, and parenting. 

Lamott tells the story of friends who gave birth to a
					very sick baby named Brice. Brice only lived for a few months, and
					Lamott and Sam often visited him during that time. When she is given
					the opportunity to do an essay for a radio show on any subject,
					she chooses to address these visits. In the essay, she describes
					Sam’s calm reaction to seeing Brice, as well as the feelings of
					Brice’s parents during his short life. Brice’s parents were touched
					and grateful for the essay. 

Lamott then discusses her students’ urge to emulate their
					favorite writers. For example, many of her students are inspired
					by the magic realism of Isabel Allende’s books, yet they are rarely
					successful at mimicking her style. Lamott counsels writers to never
					mimic other writers; rather, they should focus on finding their
					own material and voice. Ultimately, the writer must always strive
					for the truth and speak in his own voice.

Lamott frequently reiterates the concept that the writer
					must write the truth. Here she equates the truth with a unique voice
					that is free from mimicry. In searching for this unique voice, the
					writer must engage in intense self-discovery. Truth must include
					both the positive and negative elements of one’s life; one cannot
					be highlighted without the other. Therefore the mimicry of another
					author is impossible, as the writer will not be in an active search
					for the truth. While ordinary people might hide from the truth,
					the writer cannot afford to do so.

 “Writing a Present” contains echoes of Christian morality.
					Writing can be seen as a form of community service, or giving to
					someone in need. Lamott advocates this as a way to jumpstart one’s writing,
					and also as the purpose of writing itself. Much of this chapter
					is devoted to giving something to the ill or dying. A major tenet of
					Christianity is to give to those less fortunate than oneself, and Lamott
					clearly sees writing as one way to achieve this goal. Lamott will
					expound the theme of selfless giving in later chapters.

When dealing with difficult subjects such as death or
					dying, Lamott often employs her dark sense of humor. When her father
					was diagnosed with cancer, she craved books that discussed the strangeness
					of this experience, but she found only sentimental books. Lamott
					will often include dark jokes or bleak poetry in her work. She uses
					humor to stave off the sentimentality that writing on emotional topics
					might otherwise perpetuate. 

Lamott again addresses the notion of giving as it relates
					to writing and life. For Lamott, the creative act of writing is
					a way of giving back, both to the people who inspire her and to
					her audience. Her role models for learning how to give are young
					children, who give unconditionally and love unabashedly. She relates
					a story of a child, who, when asked to give a blood transfusion
					to his leukemia-afflicted sister, reluctantly agrees. As he is giving
					blood, he asks, “How soon until I start to die?” The boy was under
					the horrible misconception that he would have to give his own life
					in order to save his sister. Lamott states that she can see glimpses
					of this generosity and innocence in her friends. For writers, this
					generous nature is a gift, since it allows them to see beyond the
					ordinary.

In describing publication, Lamott emphasizes her overwhelming anxiety
					after she has submitted a manuscript to her agent. After she has
					agonized for what feels like an eternity, her agent calls to congratulate
					her on her book’s acceptance for publication. She admits that this
					is a happy time, and being published is exciting and rewarding.
					But difficulty arises when a writer believes that publication will be
					a thunderous, life changing experience. In actuality, Lamott compares
					the experience to the last days of pregnancy—it is both uncomfortable
					and emotional. 

When the reviews of the book begin to trickle in, some
					sound blandly complimentary, while others are more damaging. The
					low point for Lamott is usually the date of publication, when she
					sits and waits for the phone to ring. One time, her friend Carpenter
					and she both had books publishing on the same day. They both sat
					by the phone, waiting for it to ring, until they finally called
					each other. Lamott describes the reviews, the book parties, the
					book signings at bookstores: they will all disappoint a writer who
					believes that he will become rich and famous through publication.
					True comfort lies in the fact that being a published writer is in
					itself an achievement. 

She also warns against becoming hooked on the attention
					of being a published author. It is far wiser to concentrate on writing. Every
					time Lamott lets publishing go to her head, even briefly, she finds
					herself humbled. She recalls the time she desperately hoped to be
					invited to an illustrious literary event in San Francisco. Though she
					finally obtained an invitation, her name was omitted from several
					important announcements. She was upset until she remembered that
					this was a charity event, rather than a writer showcase. When Lamott
					finds herself getting hooked on the attention, she remembers advice
					that her pastor gave her: the world cannot give you serenity, but
					neither can it take serenity away.

Once again, Lamott describes the practice of giving, and
					how it directly pertains to writing. Though she has described giving
					to specific people in “Writing a Present,” in this chapter she engages
					in a more general discussion of giving. Her examples of giving are
					centered on children, and she draws numerous parallels between parenting
					and writing a book. Writing, like child rearing, can be difficult
					and unrewarding. But there is a sense of connection between the
					writer and his words that Lamott can only compare to the connection
					between parent and child. She advocates selflessly and continuously
					giving yourself to writing—much like parenting itself. 

She notes that the sophistication and innocence inherent
					in children is an ideal state of being for writers. Lamott sees
					an innate wisdom in children and greatly values their openness to
					the world around them. Additionally, she admits to consciously seeking
					this quality in all of her friends. 

Lamott’s discussion of publication is an intensely personal account
					of her own feelings and experiences. She views publication as exciting
					but ultimately unsatisfying. Her anecdotes focus most on the anxiety,
					self-doubt, self-criticism and disappointment of the publishing
					experience, rather than practical advice on how to get published.
					This makes Bird by Bird a peculiar kind of writing
					manual: it is far more inspirational and anecdotal than practical
					or mechanical. Ultimately, Lamott sees publishing as a false idol.
					Lamott advises her readers to find solace in their own creativity
					and in the practice of writing. 

Lamott conveys that whenever she feels proud of being
					a published author, she is inevitably humbled. In addition to warning
					that publication can be unfulfilling, she also counsels against
					feeling excessive pride at being published. Publishing—and public
					acclaim, in general—can be distracting and even damaging to the
					writer. Instead, Lamott advocates serenity, which she finds from
					her church and from her writing. When she finds herself addicted
					to attention and adulation, she approaches her pastor for advice.
					According to her, too much pride in one’s accomplishments is damaging
					not only for writers but for everyone.

In the final class of her writing workshops, Lamott tries
					to reiterate all that she has taught her students. She emphasizes
					the importance of writing about one’s childhood, and about interesting
					things and strong feelings. She advocates writing in a personal
					manner about the things the writer finds real. She notes that the
					writer has an obligation to write the truth, and that the truth
					is almost always subversive. Lamott thinks it can be good even to
					write out of vengeance. She tells her students to use some of their
					hurtful memories from their past, but that they should change significant
					details in order to avoid a libel suit. Libel is defamation by the
					printed word: a situation in which a writer maliciously says things
					that puts other people in a false, damaging light. She advises writers
					to change the physical characteristics of their characters in order
					to avoid being sued. She also humorously advises giving male characters
					a very small penis so that the people they are modeled after will
					be reluctant to come forward. 

Lamott relates the story of a student whose mother used
					to burn his hand on the stove when he misbehaved. The student was
					reluctant to write about this experience because his mother led
					such a difficult life. Lamott counseled him to change certain descriptive details
					about his mother, and when he took her advice, his story became
					a success. Writing about difficult things is about more than vengeance;
					it is about finding meaning in horrible events. Lamott also counsels
					her writers not to feel sorry for themselves when things are difficult,
					because writers can use these experiences as fodder for their work.

Lamott ends the story by praising the literary life, which
					she finds spiritually invigorating and intellectually challenging.
					Writers will feel a quiet sense of liberation and joy that comes
					from the creative life. Though Lamott believes that society is strange
					and often scary, she believes in the universality of artists. Because
					the writer writes, memories can’t be lost. Writers should strive
					to find joy in their work, and their writing allows others to find
					joy in an often complicated and uncertain world.

Lamott’s discussion of libel is one of two truly practical
					discussions in Bird by Bird (the other being her
					advice on note-taking). She believes that any strongly emotional
					event—good or bad—is acceptable material for writing. In fact, the
					more emotional the event, the more material Lamott believes the
					writer will glean from it. Therefore, her discussion on libel is
					not only appropriate but required. She counsels writers to use their
					creativity to change details about their most libelous characters.
					In this way, writers can still draw upon personal experiences without
					facing interference from the real world.

Throughout the book, Lamott asserts that writers are different from
					other people. But this section marks the first time that she suggests
					that writers are actually stronger than ordinary people. When counseling
					writers not to feel sorry for themselves, she notes that writers
					have resources (i.e., their creativity) that other people lack. Because
					of this, they should find themselves more resilient in the face of
					unfortunate events. Later in the chapter, Lamott states that writers
					prevent memories and experiences from being lost. The writer, therefore,
					has abilities that others do not. Ultimately, Lamott sees writers
					as those who are able to give solace to others in a difficult world. 

In this chapter, she notes that the liberation brought
					upon by the literary life is one of the most rewarding existences
					one can hope for. The only way that one can achieve this liberation
					is through consistency and discipline. Writers should strive to
					sit in front of their computer at the same time every day, for the
					same length of time. In order to find fulfillment as a writer, she
					recommends that they accompany this work ethic with a spiritual
					faith. By emphasizing the larger picture of the literary life, Lamott
					proves that the process of writing is its true reward, and that
					any other goal is a mirage.

