The narrator examines historians’ attitudes toward Tsar
					Alexander and Napoleon, finding them once again oversimplified,
					and asserts again the view that history is made not by great men,
					but by countless tiny factors.

Natasha and Pierre are married in 1813.
					Count Rostov dies that same year, after seeking his family’s forgiveness
					for ruining their finances. Nicholas, who is in Paris when he receives
					the news, accepts his inheritance, which amounts to debts totaling
					twice the value of the deceased count’s property. Nicholas pays
					what he can, borrowing money from Pierre, and enters government
					service to pay the rest of the debts. Nicholas struggles to maintain
					his mother and Sonya in their customary luxury, hiding his poverty
					from them.

Mary arrives in Moscow, having heard reports that Nicholas
					is sacrificing himself for his mother. Nicholas is unexpectedly
					cold to Mary. Countess Rostova presses Nicholas to court Mary. After
					a long silence, Nicholas visits Mary, treating her formally. Mary
					tells him that she misses the man she used to know, but that she
					accepts his new attitude. Secretly she still feels love, and starts
					crying. Suddenly they both realize a relationship is possible between
					them.

The year 1813 also sees the marriage
					of Nicholas and Mary. Nicholas soon repays all his debts and becomes
					a successful, traditional Russian farmer who takes special interest
					in his peasants. He rebuilds Bald Hills. Despite occasional antagonism,
					Nicholas and Mary are a happily married couple. Nicholas reads Mary’s
					parenting journal, in which she records her child-rearing experiments, such
					as grading her children on their behavior. Nicholas approves of Mary’s
					enthusiasm as a mother, though he somewhat objects to her pedantic
					style. Nicholas criticizes Natasha’s domination of Pierre without
					realizing that he dominates Mary in the same way. Mary tries to
					be patient, listening to her husband’s financial updates while striving
					to maintain Christian forbearance and forgiveness.

By 1820, Natasha has become a sturdy
					mother of four, thinking only of her family, never of fashions or
					accomplishments. Pierre wholly submits to his role as family man,
					never flirting with women or dining out. When Pierre overstays a
					trip to St. Petersburg by three weeks, Natasha becomes worried and
					irritable, but then is filled with joy when he returns with gifts
					for the family. Pierre discusses St. Petersburg gossip with his
					family and with his friend Denisov, who has accompanied him home.

Andrew’s fifteen-year-old son, Nicholas Bolkonski, adores
					Pierre and wants to stay up late to be with him. Pierre speaks to
					young Nicholas about the problems of running charitable institutions. Pierre
					asserts that things are rotten in St. Petersburg, predicting an overthrow
					soon. Privately, Natasha and Pierre reflect on their home life and
					whether Platon Karataev would have approved of it. Pierre concludes
					that the peasant would have, though he hesitates somewhat in his
					response. Nicholas Bolkonski muses on his veneration for his uncle
					Pierre, and dreams of military glory.

After further musings on the enigma of history in the
					abstract and philosophical Second Epilogue, the narrator reflects
					on human power. Power, which he defines as the collective will of
					the people transferred to one ruler, is the only identifiable motor
					that drives history forward. But power is impossible to define,
					so the mystery of history is insoluble. It is impossible to explain
					why Napoleon, for example, despite a repeatedly expressed desire
					to invade England, never took any steps to do so, but instead invaded
					Russia, a country he wanted as an ally.

The enigma of historical change implies the theological
					question about free will and the extent to which any individual
					is truly free in his actions, whatever his illusions of freedom
					may be. According to the narrator, it is just as impossible to imagine
					total freedom as it is to imagine total determinism. In the end,
					the narrator puts forth the idea that we must necessarily depend
					on a power of which we are not conscious. This idea amounts to a
					recognition that, though our sense of freedom is indispensable,
					so too is our repressed understanding that we are part of something
					bigger than ourselves, a force that moves our lives forward.

The fortunes of the Rostov family continue their fluctuations,
					but end on an optimistic upswing that bodes well for the future
					of Russia. Despite Tolstoy’s presentation of Nicholas as an honorable
					son making sacrifices for his family, the author allows room for
					a bit of criticism. The same aristocratic disregard for money matters
					that ruined the Rostovs is still present and still harmful, as we
					see in the fact that Nicholas suffers so his mother can continue
					her financially oblivious lifestyle. Yet we still sense there is
					hope for the future. Mary’s love ensures that Nicholas and his family
					are saved financially and suggests that better fortunes are fated
					for the future of Russia as a whole. It is important that enrichment
					comes from spiritual sources such as love rather than from economic
					ones—Nicholas does not consider going into trade. Nicholas’s new
					wealth is like manna from heaven rather than the fruits of enterprise.
					In his farm management, Nicholas is not interested in new western
					agricultural science, but shows a markedly traditionalist attitude
					toward his land that aligns him with his own Russian peasants more
					than with modern western landowners. Tolstoy thus hints that Russia
					can prosper as Nicholas prospers, despite a history of profligacy
					and waste, while still remaining true to his Russian traditions.

Readers who make it to the end of the novel often complain about
					the abstract dryness of the Second Epilogue, which reads more like
					a treatise on the philosophy of history than the conclusion of an
					absorbing piece of fiction. Yet the Second Epilogue, while undeniably
					difficult, is essential to understanding Tolstoy’s deepest meanings
					in War and Peace. Here, the author’s obsession
					with the irrationality of history throughout more than a thousand
					pages of the novel becomes relevant to more than just our ability
					to grasp what takes place on the field at Borodino. History is not
					simply an interpretation of events, but an investigation of their
					true causes—which, in Tolstoy’s explanation, is ultimately God.
					We finally see here that the question of history’s inexplicability
					is really a question of theology, individual free will, and our
					ability to judge our ownership of our actions and our lives.

Our unconscious dependence on hidden forces, the idea
					with which Tolstoy ends his mammoth novel, is really a final tribute
					to God’s secret laws, which are inscrutable to human minds. This inscrutable
					truth is seen not merely in wartime events like the inexplicable
					Russian victory over the French, but in personal events like Nicholas’s
					sudden and unexpected decision to wed Mary. Though this marriage
					initially seems just as irrational as Napoleon’s defeat at Borodino,
					in the end we sense that it is just as fated, and therefore yet
					another component of God’s mysterious, higher plan for human history.

