I can only cry out and implore, “Oh ring,
						ring, open wide and let us out!”

Mr. Voskuijl is diagnosed with cancer and knows he does
					not have long to live. Anne decides to stop studying shorthand because
					she is becoming nearsighted and cannot get glasses. The group briefly
					considers sending her out to an ophthalmologist, but Mr. Frank has heard
					that the British have landed in Sicily, Italy, and thinks the war will
					soon be over. Anne’s favorite day of the week is Saturday, when Bep
					brings books from the library. Anne asks Mr. Dussel if she can use
					the table in their room to study during the afternoon, but he refuses.
					They argue over it, so Mr. Frank intervenes and arranges for Anne
					to have access to the table for two afternoons each week. There
					is another break-in at the office, and this time the robbers take cash
					and ration coupons for sugar. Anne writes about what she plans to
					do when they are able to leave the annex. She says she would be
					so overjoyed she would not know where to start, but she wants to
					go back to school again.

	Two air-raid sirens sound in one day as bombs fall relentlessly
					on Amsterdam. The residents of the annex are scared, but Anne tries
					to be brave. On the radio they hear the good news that Benito Mussolini,
					Italy’s Fascist leader, has been deposed. They are forced to turn in
					the radio, which angers Mr. Dussel. Anne describes the complicated
					daily schedule of the annex, pointing out that it is very different
					from the routine that ordinary people would follow during ordinary
					times. Her account, as usual, is filled with humorous and not very
					complimentary descriptions of the other people in the annex.

	Anne receives new shoes, and Mr. Dussel almost causes
					trouble by asking Miep to bring him a banned book. Italy surrenders
					unconditionally, but Anne’s happiness is tempered by the news that
					Mr. Kleiman will have to undergo a serious stomach operation. She
					also worries that Mr. van Maaren, a man who works in the warehouse and
					is not trustworthy, will find out about the hiding place. Anne writes
					that she has been taking medication every day for depression. Bep
					is exasperated with the number of errands they ask her to run, and
					everyone’s temper is constantly flaring up. Anne compares herself
					to a bird with broken wings, longing for fresh air and sunshine.

	Margot decides to take a correspondence course in Latin
					to ease her boredom, but Anne says it is too difficult. Mr. Frank
					asks Mr. Kleiman for a children’s Bible so that Anne can learn about
					the New Testament. Miep tells Anne that she envies the peace and
					quiet of the annex. But Anne, who is constantly afraid of being
					discovered, compares the eight residents to a patch of blue sky
					surrounded by dark clouds. The clouds are coming in, and they can
					see both the destruction below them and the peace above them.

	Anne writes a memorial to her fountain pen, which she
					has owned for many years but which was accidentally melted in the stove.
					She says that her only consolation is that the pen was cremated,
					as she hopes to be when she dies.

By the middle of 1943,
					Anne’s mood becomes darker as her frustration and anger increase.
					She has plenty of time to contemplate the war, and in each diary
					entry her anxiety grows. Her tone is less cheerful and humorous,
					despite occasional injections of satire or sarcasm, particularly
					when she is annoyed with another resident of the annex. While Anne
					tries to act like a brave adult, she still jumps into her father’s
					bed during air raids and takes medication for her depression. Anne
					is still just a young girl and can no longer pretend to be strong.

	Anne gives a cynical description of her discovery that
					hypocrisy rather than honesty is the only way to get along with
					people. She displays her newfound skill at hypocrisy in her negotiations
					with Mr. Dussel over the study table in their bedroom. Although
					she considers Mr. Dussel rude and impossible to deal with, she swallows
					her feelings to gain the upper hand. By maintaining her composure, Anne
					feels superior to the “petty and pedantic” Dussel. Her language
					and behavior show us that the once-lighthearted girl is becoming
					depressed and cynical, trusting less in the security of her parents
					and relying more on her own resourcefulness.

	Although the Franks are being persecuted as Jews, they
					clearly see themselves as part of society as a whole, not members
					of a separate group. Mr. Frank demonstrates his open-mindedness
					when he decides to buy Anne a Bible. Additionally, since the Franks
					and the van Daans do not keep kosher but do celebrate both Jewish
					and Christian holidays, they most likely identified themselves as
					Germans first and Jews second. Their identity became unclear when Hitler
					came to power and they lost their German citizenship. Despite the
					forced segregation imposed in the Netherlands, the Franks settled
					in comfortably enough for Anne to consider herself part of wider
					Dutch society.

	In this section, Anne also describes more of Miep’s role
					in keeping the annex running and gives us a sense of the amount
					of work Miep has to do to keep them supplied in secret. Anne understands Miep’s
					envy of the people in the annex, since the situation outside is not
					favorable for any of the Dutch people, even non-Jews. The people
					who protect the annex are under just as much stress as those inside.
					Nonetheless, Anne knows that Miep is unaware of the difficulties
					of their life in hiding, such as the constant quarreling and frustration
					at being in such close quarters. Miep does not understand what it
					is like to be a young girl, trapped in a small attic with a whole
					world just out of reach.

	Anne’s language becomes more metaphorical in this part
					of the diary, as she increasingly attempts to describe her fear
					and depression using figurative language. She chooses to describe
					her situation in terms of the natural environment, the part of the
					world she misses most while she is in hiding. She compares herself
					to a bird with a broken wing and compares the eight residents to
					clouds caught between peace and war. Anne uses these comparisons
					to nature to express her feelings and desires that are too difficult
					to describe in literal terms.

