The dynastic dramas of the House of Atreus and the Royal
					House of Thebes are taken from the works the Greek tragedians Euripides, Aeschylus,
					and Sophocles. Euripides wrote of the House of Atreus, which includes
					Atreus’s son, Agamemnon, his family (Clytemnestra, Iphigenia, Orestes,
					and Electra), and his brother, Menelaus. The family is cursed because
					an ancestor, Tantalus, a son of Zeus who often visited Olympus,
					mysteriously decided to kill, cook, and serve his son Pelops to
					the Olympians. Discerning his heinous crime, the gods send Tantalus
					to be tormented in Hades, where he stands in a pool of water with
					fruit dangling above his head. The water sinks away when he bends
					to drink it, and the fruit rises up when he reaches to eat it. He
					is eternally tantalized—a term we use today.

Tantalus’s crime initiates generations of violence and
					tragedy, each crime begetting further bloodshed. Pelops, restored
					to life by the gods, seeks to marry the princess Hippodamia. She
					can only be won by the suitor who beats her father in a chariot
					race; if the suitor loses, he is killed. In one version, Hippodamia
					and her father’s charioteer, Myrtilus, conspire to give Pelops the
					victory, but Pelops later kills Myrtilus, bringing further bad luck
					on his family. Tantalus’s daughter Niobe decides she is the equal
					of the gods and demands that the people of Thebes worship her. As
					punishment, Apollo, and Artemis kill her seven sons and seven daughters.
					Weeping continually, she turns into a rock always wet with tears.
					Next, Pelops’s son Thyestes seduces the wife of his brother, Atreus,
					who then kills Thyestes’s two children and serves them to their
					father for dinner.

In the newest generation, Agamemnon, Menelaus’s brother,
					sacrifices his daughter Iphigenia to placate Artemis and procure
					favorable sailing winds during the Trojan War. Agamemnon’s wife, Clytemnestra,
					takes a lover—Aegisthus, son of Thyestes—while Agamemnon is away
					in Troy. Outraged at the sacrifice of her daughter Iphigenia, she
					plots revenge against her husband, while Aegisthus vows revenge
					for his father. When Agamemnon returns from Troy with Cassandra,
					the prophetess everyone always ignores, Cassandra foretells her
					and Agamemnon’s deaths but is unheeded. The two enter the palace,
					and Clytemnestra and Aegisthus kill them.

Two of Agamemnon’s children still live to perpetuate
					the bloodshed: his daughter, Electra, whom Aegisthus and Clytemnestra
					treat cruelly, and son, Orestes, whom a family friend has taken
					to protect him from Aegisthus. Orestes sets out for vengeance when
					he comes of age—even though he knows this means the terrible crime
					of matricide—and the Oracle at Delphi confirms him in this path. Returning
					to Mycenae, he runs into Electra, who is overjoyed and eager for
					him to avenge their father. Pretending to be a messenger bearing
					news of Orestes’ death, Orestes is welcomed into the palace, where
					he kills his mother and her lover. He instantly sees the terrible avenging
					Furies pursuing him, and he begins years of frenzied wanderings.
					Finally, with Apollo’s aid, he appeals to Athena, who pities him
					and turns the Furies into the Eumenides, “protectors of the suppliant.”
					The curse of the House of Atreus finally ends.

In another version of the story, Artemis grows horrified
					just before Iphigenia’s sacrifice and rescues her. Artemis brings
					Iphigenia to the land of the Taurians and makes her a priestess
					of her own temple. Regrettably, this job involves sacrificing humans,
					so Iphigenia goes about her duties very reluctantly. In this version,
					Athena has not completely absolved Orestes of guilt. The Oracle
					at Delphi tells Orestes that for his last cleansing act he must
					go to the land of the Taurians and procure the image of Artemis
					from its temple. Orestes and his friend Pylades set out on the quest,
					but the Taurians capture them almost immediately and intend to sacrifice
					them.

Orestes is taken to Iphigenia, the priestess, but the
					siblings fail to recognize each other because they have been separated
					for so long. Preparing Orestes and Pylades for death, Iphigenia
					asks where they are from. On hearing they are from Mycenae, she
					asks them about her family. She offers to set Pylades free if he
					takes a message to her brother, Orestes, telling him that she is
					alive and that he must rescue her. Orestes jumps up and reveals
					his identity. The three begin their escape with the image of Artemis.
					King Thoas of the Taurians pursues, but lets them escape when Athena
					says they are fated to do so.

“What creature,” the Sphinx asked him,
						“goes on four feet in the morning, on two at noonday, on three in
						the evening?”

Unlike the House of Atreus, the House of Thebes is named
					after a city, not a person. The dynastic head, Cadmus, is a brother
					of Europa, the woman Zeus kidnaps while she is a cow. After her
					kidnapping, her father sends her brothers to look for her. The Oracle
					at Delphi tells Cadmus to break off from the group and establish
					his own city. Fortune blesses his endeavor, but his children are
					not so lucky. He has four daughters, all of whom experience tragedy: Semele
					dies while pregnant with Dionysus; Ino becomes the wicked stepmother
					of Phrixus (from the story of the Golden Fleece) and commits suicide
					after her husband kills their son; Agave is driven mad by Dionysus
					and kills her own son, Pentheus; Autonoë’s son, Actaeon, accidentally
					sees the naked Artemis, who kills him. In the end, the gods turn
					Cadmus and his wife, Harmonia, into serpents for no reason.

The family’s greatest misfortune, however, descends upon
					Cadmus’s great-great-grandson, Oedipus. The Oracle at Delphi tells Oedipus’s
					father, King Laius of Thebes, that a son of his will one day kill
					him and marry his wife. When Oedipus is born, Laius leaves the child
					tied up on a mountain to die. Years later, Laius is killed by a man
					he meets on a highway, who everyone believes is a stranger.

In Laius’s absence, Thebes is besieged by the Sphinx,
					a monster who devours anyone who cannot answer her riddle. One day,
					Oedipus, who has grown up in Corinth as the son of King Polybus, approaches.
					He has left home because the Oracle at Delphi told him he would
					one day kill his father. Like Laius, he too wants to subvert fate.
					The Sphinx asks, “What creature goes on four feet in the morning,
					two in the afternoon, and three in the evening?” Oedipus gives the
					correct answer, “Man”—a man crawls as a baby, walks on two legs
					as an adult, and needs a cane when elderly. The Sphinx, outraged,
					kills herself. As his reward for freeing the city, Oedipus becomes
					king and marries the widowed queen, Jocasta.

A terrible plague visits Thebes. Oedipus sends Jocasta’s
					brother, Creon, to the Oracle at Delphi to ask the gods how to fix
					the situation. Creon returns to say that the plague will lift once
					Laius’s murderer is punished. Oedipus searches for the murderer,
					eventually consulting the seer Teiresias for help. Teiresias uses
					his powers to see what has happened, but does not want to tell Oedipus
					the horrible truth. Oedipus forces him, and the old man says that
					Oedipus himself is the guilty party. Oedipus and Jocasta piece events
					together: on the road from Delphi, Oedipus killed a man in a heated
					argument; they now realize that man was Laius. A messenger from
					Polybus enters and Oedipus learns that he is not Polybus’s true
					son. He realizes that he is Laius’s son and has fulfilled the horrible
					prophecy. Horrified, Jocasta kills herself and Oedipus gouges out
					his own eyes.

Oedipus abdicates the throne but remains in Thebes, and
					the throne passes to Creon. Oedipus is suddenly exiled and has only Antigone,
					his daughter, by his side to guide him. He finally rests in Colonus,
					a place near Athens sacred to the Eumenides. In the end, the kindly
					Theseus honors Oedipus for his unwitting suffering, and the tortured
					old man dies in peace. Meanwhile, his other daughter, Ismene, has
					remained in Thebes, and his two sons, Eteocles and Polyneices, fight
					over the throne. Eteocles eventually wins, but Polyneices assembles
					an army to attack the city. He convinces six other chieftains to
					join him, and the seven attack the seven gates of Thebes.

Teiresias tells Creon that Thebes will be saved if Creon’s
					son, Menoeceus, dies. Creon tries to protect the boy from battle,
					but the impetuous youth, believing he must make this sacrifice,
					rushes out to his death. Thebes is ultimately victorious, but Eteocles
					and Polyneices kill each other. Polyneices’ dying words express
					his wish to be buried in his home city, but Creon decrees that anyone
					who buries any of the six dead enemy leaders—including Polyneices—will
					be put to death. Antigone, now back in Thebes, is horrified and
					defies the law, burying her brother. True to his word, Creon executes
					her.

Though Polyneices is buried, five of the six dead chieftains
					still lie unburied. Adrastus, the only survivor of the seven, petitions
					Theseus for help. When negotiations fail, Theseus marches against Thebes,
					defeats them, forces them to honorably bury the dead, and then nobly
					retreats, having served justice. The sons of the dead men are not
					satisfied, however, and eventually band together in a group known
					as the Epigoni (the “after-born”) and level Thebes. In the end,
					all that is left of the city is a necklace Hephaestus gave to Harmonia
					upon her wedding to Cadmus.

The two most famous stories here are that of Orestes—taken
					from Aeschylus’s Oresteia, of which Agamemnon is
					the first play—and Oedipus, taken from Sophocles’ Oedipus trilogy.
					Both works concern the central idea that no deed goes without consequence,
					but the two myths deal with that idea in different ways. Oedipus
					unwittingly commits a crime, even when he does everything in his
					power to avoid doing so, because destiny has decreed it. Orestes,
					on the other hand, consciously chooses to punish evil and thereby
					commits an evil act himself. Both stories’ moral dilemmas are complex.

On the simplest level, both myths concern bad things
					that happen to good people. Oedipus is, overall, a good man. He
					does kill his father on the highway, but it is implied that it is
					done in self-defense. Oedipus acts heroically: he bravely faces
					the Sphinx, frees Thebes, rules fairly, and fervently searches for
					Laius’s killer. When he learns the evils he has committed, he punishes
					himself harshly and commits himself to a life of contemplation.
					Oedipus’s heroism comes not from great adventures but from coping
					with the impossibly cruel hand fate has dealt him. He withstands
					the worst the world has to offer with a stoic endurance. In the
					end, he is rewarded for his heroism, dying a peaceful death under
					the eye of Theseus.

Despite his heroism, Oedipus spends the bulk of his life
					in horrible suffering. He is simply a victim of cruel destiny. Again,
					evil abounds in the world of Greek myths, and many stories focus
					on characters who struggle with this inevitable wickedness of the
					world around them. Oedipus’s story, above all, highlights the immutability of
					fate, no matter how cruel. Both Laius and Oedipus are told of the pain
					that lurks in their future, and both set out to change their fate. By
					doing so, they inadvertently set in motion a chain of events that fulfills
					their fate. In the world of Oedipus, evil is an inevitability that no
					one, no matter how virtuous, can escape.

Orestes, however, has more agency, more ability to choose
					his path. Unlike Oedipus, whose actions are largely blind, Orestes
					takes vengeance upon his mother by his own choosing. The intricacy
					of Aeschylus’s Oresteia lies in the choice Orestes
					must make: it is not a simple selection between good and evil but
					a choice of whether to accept the will of the gods or ignore it,
					to accept his family legacy and fate or throw them off. Orestes
					feels compelled to accept his destiny, but it is important to note
					that he could have walked away.

The moral world of the Oresteia is,
					nonetheless, almost as cruel as the world of Oedipus. It
					is the gods who set the violent chain of events in motion, beginning
					with Artemis’s demand for Iphigenia’s sacrifice. When Orestes is
					faced with a choice, he knows the gods demand an act of vengeance
					for Agamemnon’s murder, even though he also knows he is also forbidden
					to slay his mother. He is in a lose-lose situation and is therefore
					heroic in his brave choice of a path that he knows will cause him
					pain. In the end, his heroism is rewarded when the Furies turn into
					the Eumenides. The moment almost recalls Christian imagery, as Orestes
					chooses a path of suffering and the entire world is purified as
					a result.

Both stories offer bleak visions of justice in the world.
					Unlike the simpler Greek myths—such as the stories of Tantalus and
					Creon—in which good is rewarded and evil is punished, these stories
					involve essentially good characters who suffer by little or no fault
					of their own. Other episodes, such as the Labors of Hercules, the
					story of the Trojan War, and the trials of Odysseus, have a similar
					view of the ubiquity of evil. The protagonists of those stories,
					however, become heroes in their struggle against and, for the most
					part, triumph over that evil. The stories of Oedipus and Orestes,
					however, occupy a darker universe than other myths, as both men
					must accept cruel fates and have no opportunity for epic adventure
					or glory.

