For most of the novel, Reb Saunders is an extraordinarily
				limited character, who embodies the stereotypes of the intolerant
				religious fanatic and of the provincial immigrant father. Reb Saunders’s
				harsh public quizzes, his refusal to speak to his son, his explosion
				toward Reuven concerning Zionism, and his prohibition of Danny and Reuven’s
				friendship all contribute to our impression of him as a fierce,
				autocratic, and narrow-minded individual. We assume that his only
				concern for Danny is that he study obsessively and follow the traditions,
				rituals, and customs of Hasidic Judaism, in preparation to inherit
				his father’s position as Tzaddik of his congregation.

	Yet a few of Reuven’s early observations subtly contradict
				this impression. The first occurs during Danny’s heated Talmud battles with
				his father, when Reuven observes that losing to Danny makes Reb
				Saunders happier than winning. Reb Saunders’s happy willingness
				to have his son disprove his arguments suggests a passionate, caring,
				and respectful love for his son that does not fit with the rest of
				his behavior. Later during the same Talmud session, Reb Saunders
				confronts Reuven and reveals that he knows about Danny’s library
				visits, but he expresses no anger. Instead, he seems saddened and,
				above all, bewildered. This reaction to Danny’s treachery is not what
				Reuven, Danny, or we were expecting. Finally, Reb Saunders’s suffering
				manner—the way he walks as if he is carrying a burden, the way he
				suddenly bursts into tears—seems to indicate a mysterious level
				of compassion and empathy.

In The Chosen’s final chapter, Reb Saunders
				finally reveals the motives behind his harsh actions, showing us
				he is a complex, conflicted character. Reb Saunders seems to have
				a limited, parochial perspective, but, in fact, it is Reuven’s view
				of Reb Saunders that is limited. To everyone’s surprise, Reb Saunders
				is not enraged that Danny has decided not to become a rabbi, and
				he reveals he has known of Danny’s feelings for quite a while. He
				explains that his silence toward Danny, which Reuven assumes reflects
				a lack of love, reflects just the opposite. He sees his silence
				as a selfless act to give his son emotion and compassion, respect
				and empathy for others, and an awareness of the suffering of others. 

However, despite Reb Saunder’s explanation
				of his cruel actions, his method is nevertheless dubious. Even Reb
				Saunders himself acknowledges the pain he caused, revealing his
				own conflicted feelings about the Hasidic tradition. We get the
				sense that he struggled to find another way to teach his son, but
				failed—he had no choice but to teach through silence. In the end,
				Reb Saunders is a very complex character. He represents the dangers
				of fanaticism and harmful isolationist behavior, but he also shows
				a profound, painful love for Danny and a deeply human sense of the
				importance of empathy and emotion.

