Gollum guides Frodo and Sam through the marshland that
					surrounds Mordor. The creature was once on the run from Orcs in
					the area, so he knows it well. Gollum is fearful of the sun, which
					he calls the “Yellow Face,” so he prefers to travel by night. The
					hobbits continue to feed on lembas cakes, and they
					offer some to Gollum, but he finds Elf products painful to eat.
					He chokes and spits out the cake, constantly yearning for fish and
					complaining that he will soon starve. As the hobbits get ready to
					camp for the night, Sam worries that Gollum may trick them while
					they are sleeping, so he waits until Gollum falls asleep first.
					Sam whispers the word “fish” in Gollum’s ear, and when he gets no
					reaction, he is satisfied that the creature poses no danger, at
					least not on this night. Frodo and Sam both fall asleep, despite
					Sam’s insistence on keeping one eye open, fixed on Gollum.

The next morning, the hobbits awaken to find Gollum gone. They
					again discuss their concerns about their food supply. Sam repeats
					that while he is not fond of lembas cakes, they
					are at least nourishing and keep him on his feet. But even the lembas are
					running out; Sam calculates that they have only enough left for
					three more weeks. Suddenly, Gollum reappears and says he is hungry.
					He leaves again, but soon returns with his face dirty with mud.
					The hobbits believe that they can trust him.

Gollum leads Frodo and Sam through the foul-smelling Dead Marshes,
					which are haunted by the slain warriors of a great past battle.
					Ghostly, floating lights surround them on the path. Gollum tells
					the hobbits to ignore the lights, which could lead them into the realm
					of the dead. They proceed onward for several days, nearly fainting
					from the stench of the marshes. One night, the dark shape of a Nazgûl
					flying overhead strikes fear into all three of the travelers. Gollum
					warns that the Nazgûl see everything, and report back to their master,
					the Dark Lord. Frodo is deeply disturbed by the idea that a great
					power is constantly watching him.

On the fifth morning, they wake to see that they are very
					close to Mordor. The land is desolate and unwelcoming, full of poison
					pits. Even the stinking marshland dries up, leaving an expanse of
					completely barren ground. That night, Frodo hears the dozing Gollum in
					conversation with himself, torn between his need to get his “Precious”
					and his conflicting vow to obey the hobbits. Gollum recognizes that
					Frodo is the master of the Ring, and that he must serve the master
					of his “Precious.” Frodo realizes that Gollum knows the Nazgûl are
					searching for the Ring just as he is. Gollum says something about
					never letting the servants of the Dark Lord get the Ring.

The next morning, Frodo, Sam, and Gollum have nearly arrived at
					the gates of Mordor. The hobbits thank Gollum for fulfilling his promise
					of guiding them to the gates. A Nazgûl flies overhead for the third
					time, which Gollum claims is a very bad omen. Gollum refuses to
					proceed, and Frodo must threaten him with a knife to make him go
					forward.

In this chapter, Gollum’s character becomes more mysterious
					and complicated just as the question of his trustworthiness becomes more
					crucial. When Frodo initially tames Gollum in the previous chapter,
					the creature is clearly the hobbit’s inferior, and the issue of his
					reliability does not matter much. But as the group gets closer to Mordor,
					Gollum assumes more control in relation to the hobbits. No longer
					merely a passive slave under Frodo’s knife, he is now their guide,
					whom they must trust—a slave with the power of a master. Gollum’s
					refusal to travel by the light of the sun reminds us that he is
					a creature of darkness, a corrupted opposite of Frodo. Tolkien continues
					to create suspense by playing with our suspicions along with the
					hobbits’ as Gollum briefly disappears and then reappears. Even after
					Gollum returns, claiming total loyalty to the master of his “Precious,”
					our apprehension about his motivations lingers.

The image of Gollum guiding Frodo and Sam through a barren landscape
					on their way to fulfill their mission echoes similar images from
					the ancient Greek and Roman epics. Tolkien, who was well studied
					in the classics, was very familiar with epic tales like the Odyssey and
					the Aeneid, in which the protagonists must suffer through
					a distressing journey to the underworld, often guided by somewhat
					shady or unsavory characters. On these ancient journeys, the heroes
					often must confront the dead, along with the possibility that they
					themselves may die as well. In The Two Towers, Gollum leads
					the hobbits through the Dead Marshes, a realm of the dead, with
					waters that contain ghostly images of the faces of slain warriors.
					Much like the realms of the dead in the classical epics, the landscape
					of the Dead Marshes is deeply unpleasant, devoid of life and growth.
					Yet passage through this barren landscape is a necessary step for
					the ultimate completion of the quest. As Gollum emphatically points
					out, there is simply no other way to reach Mordor, just as in the
					classical epics there was no way for the heroes to complete their
					quests without a sojourn in the underworld.

Mordor continues to become an ever stronger and darker
					reality in the novel. As the hobbits approach the dark land, it
					becomes a clearly felt presence. The landscape bordering Mordor
					is noticeably nasty, full of poison pits and barren stone outcrops,
					with an overwhelming stench saturating the air. The frightening
					Nazgûl flying overhead are a constant reminder
					of the proximity and threat of Sauron. Even the normally solid Gollum
					is deeply spooked when the Nazgûl flies overhead
					for the third time, taking it as a very bad omen. This growing atmosphere
					of evil, along with the uncertainty surrounding Gollum’s trustworthiness,
					increases yet further the suspense that propels Book IV forward.

