With the money from the Enright commission, Roark reopens
					his office. He agrees to go to a cocktail party with Austen Heller
					when Heller mentions that Dominique will attend. When Roark enters, the
					party’s hostess tries to talk to him, but finds him insolent. Heller introduces
					Roark to Dominique. She engages him in a polite conversation, and
					neither of them mentions their previous encounter. Dominique feels
					that Roark is testing her. Toohey spends the evening watching Roark
					carefully.

Dominique’s next column attacks the Enright House, but
					Toohey accuses her of actually subtly praising Roark. One of Roark’s
					potential clients, Joel Sutton, grows anxious and asks Dominique
					if he should hire Roark. She tells him that Roark will create a
					beautiful building for him, but Sutton wants something safe. Dominique
					recommends Keating. That night, Dominique visits Roark. She coldly states
					that she wants him, but that she hates him because her desire for
					him is so strong. She promises to do everything in her power to destroy
					him because she needs to test his strength. Roark understands her
					need and admires her.

When they lay in bed together it was—as
						it had to be . . . an act of violence. It was surrender, made the
						more complete by the force of their resistance.

Over the next few months, Dominique earns four commissions
					for Keating. Toohey visits her and proposes an alliance against
					Roark. She agrees. Dominique and Roark visit each other often, always
					at night. Dominique revels in Roark’s strength and in her inability
					to resist him. By day, Dominique devotes her energies to destroying Roark.
					Roger Enright, furious with Dominique, takes her to see the unfinished
					Enright House. Standing within the building’s frame makes Dominique
					euphoric. She writes an article saying no one should be allowed
					to live in the building. Enright is bewildered by this hidden praise
					of Roark. Keating cannot decipher Dominique’s actions. Everyone
					in New York thinks that Dominique is in love with Keating, but in
					private she refuses to talk to him.

When Toohey was a child, he hated anyone distinctive.
					He tried to destroy the unique and disguised his cruelty behind
					words of humility. To Toohey’s surprise, people believed him, and
					he soon had a following. At Harvard, Toohey was especially popular
					among wealthy heirs. As an adult, he began preaching submitting
					oneself to the needs of others. Upon coming to New York, he became
					a vocational adviser. He rarely counseled students to follow their
					dreams, encouraging them to pursue undesirable careers instead.
					Toohey then started publishing and became a celebrity.

In June of 1929,
					the Enright House opens. Roark receives more commissions. He signs
					a contract with a man named Anthony Cord to build a fifty-story
					skyscraper in Manhattan, his first office building. A man named
					Kent Lansing approaches Roark. Lansing wants Roark to design a luxurious
					hotel for Lansing’s corporation. After weeks of vicious debating,
					Lansing wins over the rest of the corporation’s board and they select
					Roark to build the Aquitania Hotel. 

Hopton Stoddard, one of Toohey’s dependents, wants to
					build a temple to religion. Toohey sees an opportunity and tells
					Stoddard to hire Roark. Toohey coaches Stoddard to give a speech
					that will win over Roark. Although Stoddard’s appearance and manner
					disgust Roark, Stoddard’s arguments impress him. Stoddard says he
					wants to build a temple to the human spirit and wants Roark to infuse
					it with his own soul. Roark thinks perhaps he does not understand people
					as well as he thought he did and agrees to design the temple. 

Dominique and Roark’s love affair demonstrates the novel’s premise
					that real passion involves struggle and submission. Dominique admires
					Roark intensely and wants to protect him from the world’s stupidity,
					but because she wants to test Roark’s strength she tries to destroy
					him in print and rob him of his commissions. Dominique pits herself
					against Roark in hopes that he will foil her attempts to ruin him,
					which would thus disprove her cynical view of the world. Roark understands
					her actions perfectly, and the public antagonism between Roark and
					Dominique does not drive them apart, but brings them together. Dominique’s
					attempts to crush Roark drive the normally frigid pair to a state
					of ecstasy. 

Rand contrasts the harsh and exquisite love of Dominique
					and Roark with the tender cuddling of Keating and Katie. Keating
					and Katie always treat each other with consideration and consequently their
					love feels flat and devoid of real sexual charge. They also lack the
					intuitive understanding of one another that Dominique and Roark
					enjoy. Roark always understands what motivates Dominique’s behavior,
					even when she acts in ways that most people would find perverse
					or inexplicable. Keating seems to misunderstand the most basic facts
					about Katie, not noticing, for example, that her very soul is being
					threatened by her uncle. Even in love affairs, The Fountainhead favors
					the strong over the weak, praising the violence of Roark’s relationship
					over the meekness of Keating’s relationship. 

	Rand shows us that Toohey’s lifework will never succeed.
					He spends his days trying to destroy the exceptional. He wants to
					convince the world that mediocrity is the greatest attribute, thereby robbing
					mankind of its idealism and ambition. However, Toohey can never
					destroy every genius and he can never persuade everyone to aim for
					mediocrity. Theoretical sympathy for the masses motivates Toohey,
					who sees the accomplishments of great men as insults to the millions
					who cannot achieve greatness in their own right. Tooley’s motivation
					is also personal. He knows that he will never join the ranks of
					the elite, so instead of wasting his energy attempting to join them,
					he attempts to destroy them. He believes that if he can convince
					the world that mediocrity is the greatest of attributes, if he can
					rob mankind of its idealism and hope, if he can flatten all of society
					into a smooth mass of unexceptional men, then he can become a great
					man. In order to achieve his goals, Toohey employs the language and
					arguments of religion and socialism. Rand was both a staunch atheist
					and a great antisocialist. She found that both religion and socialism
					ask humans to renounce themselves for a greater good. Such renunciation
					of the ego is dangerous, argues Rand, as it opens an individual up
					to manipulation. She makes both of these systems unappealing to
					us by making them the ideals of the repellant Toohey.

