In A Border Passage, Leila Ahmed
				searches for the meaning of her identity as a woman, an Arab, and an Egyptian,
				as well as an understanding of how being in those categories shapes her place in
				the world. As a child, she moves unthinkingly between the imaginative realm of
				her home, the women’s community at her grandmother’s house, and an English
				school in which Western ideas are revered over all others, but she ultimately
				learns that negotiating such cultural and social borders has serious
				consequences. Her playmates hail from many parts of the world and from many
				different faiths, and Ahmed understands the implications of those cultural and
				religious differences only after experiencing the turmoil of her country’s quest
				for independence and leaving Egypt to explore the larger world. While at
				Cambridge, Ahmed struggles to understand how her intelligent classmates can
				practice such a genteel form of racism, lumping together all students from the
				third world under the banner of “black.” Ahmed’s investigation of such
				categories becomes central to her academic pursuits.

Through her highly personal writing, Ahmed makes many connections between
				her own experiences and politics, showing how personal decisions and identities
				resonate in the larger world. Ahmed locates her political awakening in her
				childhood, when she first discovered the contrast between men’s and women’s ways
				of knowing and discussing Islam in her grandmother’s living room. This discovery
				colors her further investigations into religious, race, and gender studies, as
				Ahmed works to unravel the diverse strands of her upbringing. In her memoir,
				Ahmed reveals what it means to move across the world’s increasingly fluid
				borders, and she offers a view of history that is more powerful because it is so
				personal. Her identity is shaped by a feeling of cultural displacement as an
				Egyptian student in an English school in Cairo, and then as a minority student
				at Cambridge, and Ahmed applies keen insight to the question of what it means to
				be an Arab woman in the modern world. As an adult, Ahmed is able to embrace
				varying labels—Muslim feminist, intellectual, Egyptian, Arab—while bringing a
				nuanced understanding of how those labels both limit and define those who adopt
				them.

