Our consciousness rarely registers the
						beginning of a growth within us any more than without us: there
						have been many circulations of the sap before we detect the smallest
						sign of the bud.

	Silas suddenly appears in the middle of the tavern, his
					agitation giving him a strange, unearthly appearance. For a moment,
					everyone present, regardless of his stance in the previous argument
					about the supernatural, believes he is looking at a ghost. Silas,
					short of breath after his hurried walk to the inn, finally declares
					that he has been robbed. The landlord tells Jem Rodney, who is sitting
					nearest Silas, to seize him, as he is delirious. Hearing the name,
					Silas turns to Rodney and pleads with him to give his money back,
					telling him that he will give him a guinea and will not press charges.
					Rodney reacts angrily, saying that he will not be accused.

	The tavern-goers make Silas take off his coat and sit
					down in a chair by the fire. Everyone calms down, and Silas tells
					the story of the robbery. The villagers become more sympathetic
					and believe Silas’s story, largely because he appears so crushed
					and pathetic. The landlord vouches for Jem Rodney, saying that he
					has been in the inn all evening. Silas apologizes to Rodney, and
					Mr. Dowlas, the farrier, asks how much money was lost. Silas tells
					him the exact figure, which is more than 270 pounds.
					Dowlas suggests that 270 pounds could be
					carried out easily, and he offers to visit Silas’s cottage to search
					for evidence, since Silas’s eyesight is poor and he might have missed
					something. Dowlas also offers to ask the constable to appoint him
					deputy-constable, which sets off an argument. Mr. Macey objects
					that no doctor can also be a constable and that Dowlas—whose duties
					as a farrier including the treatment of livestock diseases—is a
					sort of doctor. A compromise is reached wherein Dowlas agrees to
					act only in an unofficial capacity. Silas then leaves with Dowlas
					and the landlord to go to the constable’s office.

Godfrey returns home from the dance to find that Dunsey
					has not yet returned. Godfrey is distracted by thoughts of Nancy
					Lammeter, and does not think very much about his brother’s whereabouts.
					By morning, everyone is discussing the robbery, and Godfrey and
					other residents of the village visit Silas’s cottage to gather evidence
					and gossip. A tinder-box is found on the scene and is suspected
					to be somehow connected to the crime. Though a few villagers suspect that
					Silas is simply mad or possessed and has lied about the theft, others
					defend him. Some townspeople suspect that occult forces took the
					money, and consider clues such as the tinder-box useless.

	The tinder-box reminds Mr. Snell, the tavern landlord,
					of a peddler who had visited Raveloe a month before and had mentioned that
					he was carrying a tinder-box. The talk among the townspeople turns
					to determining the peddler’s appearance, recalling his “evil looks”
					and trying to determine whether or not he wore earrings. Everyone
					is disappointed, however, when Silas says he remembers the peddler’s
					visit but never invited him inside his cottage. Godfrey, remembering
					the peddler as a “merry grinning fellow,” dismisses the stories
					about the peddler’s suspicious character. Silas, however, wanting
					to identify a specific culprit, clings to the notion of the peddler’s
					guilt.

	Dunsey’s continuing absence distracts Godfrey from this
					discussion, and Godfrey worries that Dunsey may have run away with
					his horse. In an attempt to find out what has happened, Godfrey
					rides to the town where the hunt started and encounters Bryce, the
					young man who had agreed to buy Wildfire. Bryce is surprised to
					learn of Dunsey’s disappearance and tells Godfrey that Wildfire
					has been found dead. Seeing no alternative and hoping to free himself
					from Dunsey’s threats of blackmail, Godfrey decides to tell his
					father not only about the rent money but about his secret marriage
					as well. Godfrey steels himself for the worst, as Squire Cass is
					prone to violent fits of anger and rash decisions that he refuses
					to rescind, even when his anger has passed. The next morning, Godfrey
					decides to confess only partly and to try to direct his father’s
					anger toward Dunsey.

Silas’s incorporation into Raveloe begins in Chapter 7.
					His devastation at the loss of his money is evident, and it inspires
					sympathy in his audience at the tavern. When the news spreads, the
					village takes an immense interest, based partly on mere curiosity
					but also on some genuine concern. Whereas he was previously looked
					upon with a mixture of fear and contempt, Silas is now the object
					of real sympathy. The townspeople’s concern has an effect on Silas,
					even if at first he does not notice it. As Eliot notes, “Our consciousness rarely
					registers the beginning of a growth within us any more than without
					us: there have been many circulations of the sap before we detect
					the smallest sign of the bud.” Silas’s incipient bond with the rest
					of Raveloe is likened to a bud on a plant, a clearly hopeful and positive
					metaphor of rebirth.

	This bond, however, is reinforced only through scapegoating another
					outsider, the peddler. The townspeople’s suspicion of the peddler
					and their conjectures about his earrings are laughable, but such
					behavior emphasizes the insularity of the village. The townspeople
					are deeply suspicious of strangers, especially those with dark skin
					and earrings who resemble gypsies. However, there is nonetheless
					some element of logic to these suspicions. As Jem Rodney points out,
					if a village resident stole the money, it would be quite difficult for
					him or her to spend it without attracting attention.

	Eliot fleshes out Godfrey’s character in Chapter Eight,
					as Godfrey debates whether to come clean to his father. As Eliot
					writes earlier, Godfrey possesses plenty of “animal courage,” but
					is cursed with “natural irresolution and moral cowardice.” He is
					weak and spoiled, unwilling to make sacrifices for what he knows
					to be right. Like Dunsey, Godfrey is self-interested and shortsighted:
					he repeatedly puts off decisions about his future in the hope that
					his situation will right itself. Unlike the malicious Dunsey, however,
					Godfrey is basically decent and periodically attempts to do good.
					Godfrey’s resistance to the townspeople’s suspicions about the peddler
					shows that he is at least somewhat free of their antiquated superstitions.

	For all his physical grace and strength, Godfrey is a
					passive character. The one significant act he has taken, marrying
					Molly Farren, occurred only under pressure from his brother and
					from Molly herself. Furthermore, even when pushed to act, Godfrey
					still tends to remain unwilling to own up to the greater consequences
					of his actions, and is thus left in limbo. Eliot contrasts Godfrey’s
					passivity not only with Dunsey’s active malice but also with Squire
					Cass’s violent temper. Like Godfrey, the Squire is lazy and fails
					to heed his troubles until they are impossible to ignore. The Squire
					only reaches decisions in fits of anger, making violent and rash
					resolutions that he refuses to revoke even when his head has cooled.
					Godfrey, in contrast, never erupts, and merely continues to backpedal.

	Though Godfrey is incapable of action, his inaction nonetheless sets
					events in motion: it frustrates the Squire and Nancy, who wonder
					why Godfrey has not proposed marriage; it allows Dunsey to take
					advantage of Godfrey and act in his place; and eventually it forces
					Molly, and then Silas, into actions of great significance. Ironically,
					it is thus the perpetually irresolute Godfrey who drives much of
					the major action of the novel.

