The book’s full title is Clarissa, or, The History
					of a Young Lady. While this is definitely Clarissa’s story,
				it is also the story of a generalized “young lady.” Clarissa is
				a fable designed to show, as stated on the title page, “the distresses
				that may attend the misconduct both of parents and children, in
				relation to marriage.” In some ways, the character of Clarissa occupies
				a figurative position, rather than a literal one: she symbolizes
				an idealized, absolutely pure and moral heroine struggling to maintain
				her virtue amid the wicked pressures of society. Her story, as Richardson
				makes explicit in the introduction and within the novel itself,
				is one that could happen to any young girl.

Yet Clarissa is not Everywoman; she is
				the feminine ideal. All who come into her presence are immediately
				overwhelmed with admiration. Much of the credit for this goes to
				Clarissa’s physical beauty, which transparently reveals the true
				beauty of her soul. But, as Belford tells Lovelace, it is her conversation
				that wins all hearts. In addition to being widely read, Clarissa
				is exceptionally and precociously intelligent; even the learned
				minister benefits from talking with her. She is devoted to the service
				of the poor, and, instead of giving handouts to all and sundry,
				she constructs intelligent systems through which the hardworking
				and honest are given the means to improve their situation. Especially
				toward the end of the book, Clarissa’s exemplarity is shown in her
				religious devotion; she spends the better part of her days praying,
				and her attainment of true virtue is encoded in her willingness
				to meet death.

Clarissa is brought to tragedy in part by her social environment: as
				an unmarried woman, Clarissa has little power to resist either her autocratic
				family or Lovelace’s wicked plots. Her fate can also be blamed on
				her very perfection; it is what makes her such an appealing target
				for Lovelace, what generates her siblings’ jealousy, what prevents
				her from compromising her way out of a bad situation. The combination
				of these two factors suggests that perfection cannot exist in an
				imperfect world; amid the jealousy and lust of humanity, an angelic
				creature can fulfill her nature only by dying.

