The narrator says that before Roxanne began singing every
					morning, the hostages felt sad. They saw death everywhere, they
					missed their families, and they were under the generals’ control.
					On the morning Roxanne sings for the first time, the house is transformed. The
					generals lose some control, but they don’t really mind; they don’t
					have any reasonable plan for how to end the siege, so they are partly
					happy to give up some power. Roxanne practices every day for three
					hours in the morning and sometimes again in the late afternoon.

Hosokawa compares his old life, in which he was able to
					listen to opera for just  an hour or so a day, and his new life,
					in which he listens to Coss sing in person. He recalls the hard
					times of his childhood: his mother’s death when he was ten years
					old, his father’s prolonged sadness. He thinks of his wife. He and
					she coexist well together, but now he wonders if he knows her at
					all. Hosokawa thinks about the fact that his wife reads mystery
					novels, but he has never thought to ask her about them, and she
					has never talked to him about them either. He wonders if he has
					ever made her happy. 

When Beatriz asks Watanabe if it’s time for her soap opera
					yet, Watanabe gives her his watch. He finds that in this situation,
					where there is nowhere to go and no appointments to keep, the watch
					only bothers him. Watanabe begins to teach Beatriz how to tell time.
				

Viktor Fyodorov approaches Watanabe and asks him for a
					favor: he wants to speak to Coss. Watanabe agrees to help, but Fyodorov says
					that there is no rush; they can do it another day. The narrator explains
					that Fyodorov wants to declare his love for Coss, which Watanabe
					does not know. Watanabe stands at the window and watches Carmen.
					He is beginning to fall in love with her.

The same day Coss begins to sing, the government sends
					in boxes of raw foods instead of the prepared foods they have been
					sending. To Iglesias, this is a sign that the outside world may
					be forgetting about them. There is also a more immediate worry:
					who will prepare the food? Iglesias, who has taken up the responsibility
					of keeping the house neat and tidy, finds that he enjoys housekeeping
					and is better at it than he was at being vice president. But cooking
					food is a different matter. Iglesias decides to ask Coss for advice.
					He doesn’t expect the diva to help him cook, but he assumes she
					can at least offer him some advice. Coss is at first slightly offended
					that he would think to ask her but decides that it is a problem
					of cultural differences, and she tells him politely that she knows
					nothing about cooking.

Watanabe and Iglesias poll the men to find out who can
					cook. Thibault, an experienced cook, agrees to make the meal. He
					is faced with another question. How will they prepare the food if
					none of the hostages are allowed to have knives and all the knives
					from the kitchen have been confiscated? General Benjamin agrees
					to let Carmen and Beatriz chop the food for the dinner. General
					Benjamin asks Watanabe if he plays chess, and Watanabe says that
					Hosokawa is a good chess player. The general asks Watanabe to ask
					Hosokawa to play with him sometime.

Watanabe returns to the kitchen, and Carmen, Beatriz,
					and Ishmael soon follow. Thibault tells Ishmael he’s peeling the
					eggplant wrong, and asks for the knife so he can show him how to
					do it correctly. When Beatriz sees Thibault with a knife in his
					hand, she drops her own, grabs her gun, and points it at him. Thibault
					calmly asks Beatriz to let him show Ishmael how to cut up the eggplant.
					He says that Beatriz can shoot him and Watanabe if he uses the knife
					for any other purpose.

Watanabe does not appreciate the suggestion that he could
					be shot. But he stays in the kitchen just to be near Carmen. In
					a stolen moment, the two of them agree to meet in the china closet
					that night when everyone else is asleep to have their first reading
					and writing lesson.

In this chapter, we learn that Hosokawa’s mother died
					when he was ten years old. One year after his mother’s death, when
					he was eleven, Hosokawa fell in love with opera when he went with
					his father to see Giuseppe Verdi’s Rigoletto. That
					opera tells the story of a father who loses his daughter. Perhaps
					Hosokawa, still raw from his mother’s death, found solace in an
					art form that makes exquisite music about passionate love, tragic
					death, and the loss of family. 

Patchett juxtaposes Hosokawa’s memories of the deep pain
					of his childhood and the joy of opera with descriptions of the pleasant but
					bland relationship he has with his wife. Perhaps the trauma of losing
					his mother at a young age makes Hosokawa leery of forging deep connections
					to people. If he does not love anyone passionately, he does not
					risk a repetition of the despair he felt when his mother died. It
					seems possible that Hosokawa seeks out comfort, safety, and order
					in his human relationships and confines his passionate love to opera.
					But when opera suddenly fills his life in the person of Roxanne
					Coss, that detachment disappears. 

In the tensest scene in Chapter Six, Beatriz points her
					gun at Thibault. Everyone is reminded that even though life has
					grown pleasant, the terrorists have guns, and death is still a possibility.
					But despite the danger, Thibault insists on treating the young terrorists as
					children, not as mortal threats. Earlier in the novel, he startled
					the terrorists by turning on the TV with the remote control. They responded
					by turning a gun on him. In this scene, he directly violates orders
					by asking the terrorists to trust him with a knife. Again, he finds
					himself threatened with a gun. Like Coss’s singing, which Hosokawa
					describes as “reckless and controlled,” Thibault’s commanding behavior
					is both risky and calm. His insistence on treating children as children
					is also evidence of his kindness.

