As Candide’s mentor and a philosopher, Pangloss is responsible
				for the novel’s most famous idea: that all is for the best in this
				“best of all possible worlds.” This optimistic sentiment is the
				main target of Voltaire’s satire. Pangloss’s philosophy parodies
				the ideas of the Enlightenment thinker G. W. von Leibniz. Leibniz
				maintains that an all-good, all-powerful God had created the world
				and that, therefore, the world must be perfect. When human beings
				perceive something as wrong or evil, it is merely because they do
				not understand the ultimate good that the so-called evil is meant
				to serve. Like Candide, Pangloss is not a believable character;
				rather, he is a distorted, exaggerated representation of a certain
				kind of philosopher whose personality is inseparable from his philosophy.

	Voltaire illustrates two major problems inherent in Pangloss’s philosophy.
				First, his philosophy flies in the face of overwhelming evidence
				from the real world. Pangloss is ravaged by syphilis, nearly hanged,
				nearly dissected, and imprisoned, yet he continues to espouse optimism.
				He maintains his optimistic philosophy even at the end
				of the novel, when he himself admits that he has trouble believing
				in it. Voltaire advocates the induction of ideas from concrete evidence;
				Pangloss, in contrast, willfully ignores any evidence that contradicts
				his initial opinion. He also produces illogical arguments to support
				his preconceived notions, justifying the consumption of pork by
				saying that “since pigs were made to be eaten, we eat pork all year
				round.”

	Second, Pangloss’s philosophy encourages a
				passive and complacent attitude toward all that is wrong in the
				world. If this world is the best one possible, than there is no
				reason to make any effort to change things perceived as evil or
				wrong. Therefore, when Pangloss’s benefactor Jacques is drowning
				in the bay of Lisbon, Pangloss prevents Candide from trying to rescue
				him by “proving that the bay of Lisbon had been formed expressly
				for [Jacques] to drown in.” The consequence of this mode of thinking
				is that, “while [Pangloss] was proving the point a priori, the vessel
				opened up and everyone perished.”

