Mysterious, manipulative, and utterly corrupt, Quilty
				is Humbert’s doppelgänger. He serves as a kind of mirror image of
				Humbert, reflecting similar traits and thoughts but embodying a
				darker side of those characteristics that Humbert stridently disavows.
				Quilty and Humbert both adore nymphets, but they act on their adoration
				in very different ways. While Humbert slavishly worships and idealizes
				Lolita, Quilty takes her for granted and wishes to denigrate her through
				pornography. Humbert paints himself as a man in love, while Quilty
				is, in many ways, a more typical pedophile. Both Quilty and Humbert
				are men of letters, well read and very persuasive, but Quilty has
				a much more successful career. Quilty is also far less subtle than
				Humbert about his nymphet obsession. Quilty’s professional success
				and reputation perhaps allow him to get away with his deviant behavior,
				though he is well known for his predilection for young girls and
				has already faced charges. At his final encounter with Humbert,
				Quilty’s baroque speech, cavalier attitude, and persistent game-playing
				imply that he, like Humbert, is not quite sane. He dies in the middle
				of an attempt to bribe Humbert with a variety of perverse pleasures. 

Physically, Quilty appears infrequently in the novel,
				but his presence asserts itself through a relentless series of hidden
				clues. These clues, which include initials, place names, titles,
				and many other references and suggestions, build and intensify,
				creating a dense cloud above the actual story that eventually bursts
				when Lolita identifies Quilty as her lover. The clues reinforce
				the idea that Quilty is Humbert’s double, since he exists more as
				a shadow than as a living human being. That Lolita adores the intangible
				Quilty and remains unmoved by solid, present Humbert represents
				one of the novel’s crueler twists, and suggests that Lolita may
				indeed have had her eye on a future outside of Humbert’s control. 

