He was not the corrupt publisher of a
						popular empire. He was an aristocrat aboard a yacht. He looked,
						she thought, like what one believes an aristocrat to be when one
						is young: a brilliant kind of gaiety without guilt.

Wynand and Dominique return to New York and Wynand goes
					to see Keating. He offers Keating $250,000 and
					the Stoneridge contract in exchange for Dominique. After a moment’s
					hesitation, Keating accepts. Later, he feels an immense grief over
					his loss and realizes that he loves Dominique. Toohey dislikes the
					idea of a union between Dominique and Wynand, two people who are
					potentially very dangerous to him. Dominique goes to visit Roark,
					who is now working at a construction site in Clayton, Ohio. She
					finds him working late and tells him her plans. Roark remembers
					that Henry Cameron hated Wynand. Dominique’s news pains Roark, but
					he does not object. He and Dominique talk with an easy intimacy,
					but their time together is very painful for her.

Ike, a member of Toohey’s new Council of American Writers,
					reads his play at an informal meeting. The play is awful, but like
					Toohey’s young architects, the young writers congratulate each other
					on their mediocre talent. With Toohey’s help, they have become the
					nation’s literary elite. In his column, Toohey comes out in support
					of modern architecture. In Europe, more and more architects are
					designing pale imitations of Henry Cameron’s buildings, and Toohey approves
					of this trend. Modern architecture, he argues, is now a cohesive
					and organized style. This change in tastes hurts Keating, whose
					works are all combinations of other styles. Francon retires and
					Keating picks a lazy designer named Neil Dumont as his new partner.
					The firm begins to slip.

When Dominique returns to New York, Wynand wants a quick,
					private ceremony. Dominique, however, wants a huge public wedding, as
					crass and vulgar as possible. They get married in an elaborate ceremony
					at an exclusive hotel and Dominique wears a long black dress. The Banner is
					flooded with letters denouncing Wynand’s marriage to a divorced
					and decadent woman.

Wynand and Dominique don’t leave their penthouse for two
					weeks. Although Dominique never forgets that Wynand represents everything
					evil in the world, she finds his heart and soul somehow heroic. Whenever
					Dominique asks about Wynand’s newspapers, he coldly responds that
					he will never apologize for the Banner. In the
					spring, Wynand leaves for a publisher’s convention. When he returns, Dominique
					brings him to see the play of one of Toohey’s protégées, which the Banner has
					highly praised. Dominique forces Wynand to face the world he created.
					She calls them both traitors—herself for sacrificing happiness in
					order to escape the world, and Wynand for sacrificing his integrity
					in order to control it. Wynand admits that he hates the idea of
					perfection. There is no such thing as a perfectly honorable man,
					he claims, and he has spent a great deal of money and time trying
					to prove it.

Wynand tells Dominique that he plans to erect a building
					of great beauty in Hell’s Kitchen. Dominique warns Wynand about
					Toohey, who has slowly replaced much of the staff of the Banner with
					his favorites. Dominique says that Wynand is trying to assume control of
					the paper so that he can control the world. Wynand only laughs at her
					warning. At times, Wynand and Dominique barely speak. When Wynand
					tells Dominique that he loves her, she thinks of Roark. Dominique
					apologizes to Wynand for marrying him but not loving him. Wynand
					does not care and replies that he is happy. He has never loved anything
					before and she gives his life meaning.

In these chapters Toohey’s small efforts start to accumulate
					and gain momentum, and Rand likens Toohey’s machinations to events
					following the Russian Revolution of 1917.
					Toohey begins to grow more powerful in a series of moves that mimic
					the rise of Russian dictator Joseph Stalin in the 1920s.
					Stalin worked to replace all the men in the lowly positions in the
					Communist party. When elections came, Stalin’s opponent Trotsky
					found himself ousted by a party of Stalin loyalists. Once Stalin
					came to power, he eliminated great numbers of able and distinguished
					men so that no one could challenge him. Similarly, Toohey tries
					to create a world where men like Roark and Mallory are not only
					ignored but actively destroyed. Toohey’s followers and
					protégées increase in number, and although they are all substandard
					men, they become very prominent with the support of a sensationalist
					press controlled by Toohey. As Dominique realizes, Toohey has begun
					weeding out the talented people from Wynand’s staff and replacing
					them with his own mediocre people. Although Wynand is officially
					the boss, Toohey slowly attacks Wynand’s base of power and even
					turns the newspaper staff against Wynand. 

	Keating’s cynical decision to sell his wife to Wynand
					marks the end of his brief happiness, and with this display of weakness
					and amorality his fortunes begin to change. In only a few chapters,
					Keating gives up a woman he loves, finds that Toohey no longer has
					time for him, and enters a period of mediocrity unusual even for
					him. Early in the novel, Keating’s and Roark’s careers were juxtaposed, but
					now Keating is never mentioned in the same breath with Roark’s name.
					Toohey, who built Keating’s career by praising him in the newspaper,
					now distances himself from his protégé by embracing a philosophy
					of architecture that contradicts everything Keating has ever designed.
					Consistent with his philosophy, Toohey thinks of Keating not as
					a human being, but as a pawn that must move wherever Toohey’s whim
					commands. Keating can no longer rely on Katie, for she has capitulated
					to her uncle and become a broken woman. Keating has always drawn
					his strength from the praise and loyalty of others, and once they
					leave him he finds himself with no inner resources.

	Wynand, on the other hand, regains the convictions of
					his youth and becomes stronger as Dominique’s influence begins to
					chip away at his disillusionment. Although Dominique never gets
					Wynand to express regret for his misdeeds, she does make him reconsider
					his actions, and leaves him primed to come over to Roark’s side.
					She helps pull Wynand’s true heart and spirit from beneath the ruthlessness
					and forcefulness that mark his way of doing business.

