Lord Henry is a man possessed of “wrong, fascinating,
				poisonous, delightful theories.” He is a charming talker, a famous
				wit, and a brilliant intellect. Given the seductive way in which
				he leads conversation, it is little wonder that Dorian falls under
				his spell so completely. Lord Henry’s theories are radical; they
				aim to shock and purposefully attempt to topple established, untested, or
				conventional notions of truth. In the end, however, they prove naïve,
				and Lord Henry himself fails to realize the implications of most
				of what he says.

Lord Henry is a relatively static character—he does not
				undergo a significant change in the course of the narrative. He
				is as coolly composed, unshakable, and possessed of the same dry
				wit in the final pages of the novel as he is upon his introduction.
				Because he does not change while Dorian and Basil clearly do, his
				philosophy seems amusing and enticing in the first half of the book,
				but improbable and shallow in the second. Lord Henry muses in Chapter
				Nineteen, for instance, that there are no immoral books; he claims
				that “[t]he books that the world calls immoral are books that show
				the world its own shame.” But since the decadent book that Lord
				Henry lends Dorian facilitates Dorian’s downfall, it is difficult
				to accept what Lord Henry says as true.

Although Lord Henry is a self-proclaimed hedonist who
				advocates the equal pursuit of both moral and immoral experience,
				he lives a rather staid life. He participates in polite London society
				and attends parties and the theater, but he does not indulge in
				sordid behavior. Unlike Dorian, he does not lead innocent youths
				to suicide or travel incognito to the city’s most despised and desperate
				quarters. Lord Henry thus has little notion of the practical effects
				of his philosophy. His claim that Dorian could never commit a murder because
				“[c]rime belongs exclusively to the lower orders” demonstrates the
				limitations of his understanding of the human soul. It is not surprising,
				then, that he fails to appreciate the profound meaning of Dorian’s
				downfall.

