As Gandalf and Pippin ride toward Minas Tirith, Aragorn, Théoden,
					and the Riders of Rohan return from Isengard. Aragorn cryptically
					explains to Gimli, Legolas, and Merry that he must proceed to Minas
					Tirith by a darker, as yet undetermined route. On the way to Rohan,
					the group encounters thirty Dúnedain of the North—Rangers and friends
					of Aragorn, including Elrond’s two sons, Elladan and Elrohir. The
					Dúnedain are gruff but proud, clad almost entirely in gray. They
					have received a mysterious message requesting that they come to
					Aragorn’s aid. Théoden welcomes the Dúnedain to his company, and
					Elrohir conveys a message to Aragorn from Rivendell: “If thou art
					in haste, remember the Paths of the Dead.” After a time, the group
					reaches Helm’s Deep, the refuge of the Riders of Rohan. Théoden
					asks Merry to ride with him for the rest of the journey. Merry is
					delighted, as he feels out of place among the Riders and wishes
					to be useful. He offers Théoden his sword in service of Rohan, and
					the king gladly accepts.

As Théoden prepares the group to resume the journey, the
					group suddenly realizes that Aragorn is missing. He reappears exhausted and
					sorrowful. Aragorn knows that the Riders will not arrive at Minas
					Tirith in time. He has decided to take the Dúnedain with him to
					Minas Tirith via a terrifying road—the Paths of the Dead. It is said
					that no living man may travel the Paths, but Aragorn says that the
					proper heir of Elendil may safely pass. Meanwhile, Théoden and the
					Riders take a slower, safer path east through the mountains to Edoras.

Aragorn informs Legolas and Gimli that he has consulted
					the palantír, the Stone of Orthanc that Saruman
					used to communicate with Sauron. Aragorn has confronted Sauron through
					the palantír and claims he has successfully subdued
					the stone’s power to his own will. In doing so, however, Aragorn
					has alerted Sauron to his existence as Isildur’s heir to the throne
					of Gondor. Gimli guesses Sauron will now release his forces sooner
					because he knows Isildur’s long-awaited heir exists. Aragorn, however,
					hopes such a hasty move may weaken the Enemy’s attack.

Aragorn explains the history of the Paths of the Dead,
					citing a legendary song. In the early days of Gondor, Isildur set
					a great black stone upon the hill of Erech. Upon this stone, the
					King of the Mountains swore allegiance to Isildur. When Sauron returned
					and waged war on Gondor, Isildur called upon his allies for aid.
					The Men of the Mountains broke their oath, as they had begun to
					worship Sauron. Isildur condemned the Men never to rest until their
					oath was fulfilled. According to the verse, the Sleepless Dead,
					or Oathbreakers, must fulfill their oath to Isildur’s heir when
					he returns to call them from the Stone of Erech. Rallying the Rangers,
					Aragorn rides through the plains of Rohan and reaches Dunharrow
					by morning. Théoden has not yet arrived, but his daughter, Éowyn,
					begs Aragorn to avoid the Paths of the Dead. Aragorn refuses.

Outside Dunharrow lies the entrance to the Paths of the
					Dead, which run beneath the mountain. Spurred only by the strength
					of Aragorn’s will, the Company enters the dark path. Gimli is nearly paralyzed
					with fear, as he can hear the whispering voices of an unseen host
					following the Company in the dark. At a clearing, Aragorn turns
					and speaks to the Dead, summoning them to follow him to the Stone
					of Erech.

After creeping in the darkness for what seems like ages,
					the Company emerges from the Paths and rides quickly through the
					mountain fields with the Men, horses, and banners of the Dead following behind.
					The inhabitants of the surrounding countryside flee in fear, calling
					Aragorn the “King of the Dead.” Arriving at the large, black Stone
					of Erech, the legion of the Dead—the Oathbreakers—announce their
					allegiance to Aragorn. Aragorn unfurls a black flag and pronounces
					himself the heir of Isildur’s kingdom. The Company rides on to the
					Great River, Anduin.

The events of the first three chapters of The
						Return of the King follow each other in parallel, tracing
					the separate paths of Gandalf, Aragorn, and Théoden, with their
					respective parties, in the moments leading up to the day the Darkness
					settles. These synchronized chapters convey the experience of parallax—the
					observation of the same cosmic or heavenly event from different
					locations. Merry and Pippin watch the Darkness arrive from opposite
					ends of Middle-earth. Their different vantage points further emphasize
					the vast effect of Sauron’s evil on the natural world. While each
					chapter is narrated in the third person, the narration is typically
					limited to the perspective of each group’s most diminutive member:
					Pippin at Minas Tirith, Gimli in the Paths of the Dead, and Merry
					with the Riders of Rohan. Tolkien’s narrative voice implies that
					the most important aspect of the quest and the war against Mordor
					is not the outcome of these cataclysmic events, but each character’s
					personal, subjective experience of the events—even that of the smallest
					or most frightened character.

This chapter also highlights the importance of song and
					myth, a motif that surfaces frequently throughout the novel. We
					may tend to think of songs and stories as entertainment to help
					pass the time, separate from the urgent and practical matters of
					everyday life. But in the early cultures Tolkien studied and upon
					which he modeled Middle-earth—cultures dominated by the spoken rather
					than the written word, before the advent of widespread literacy—songs
					and stories were vital and indispensable tools. They conveyed information
					that was not recorded anywhere else, keeping that legacy alive for
					future generations. We see the importance of song here when Aragorn
					cites an ancient song to teach his companions about the Paths of
					the Dead and the menacing Oathbreakers. When Aragorn emerges from
					the Paths, one could can say that he literally owes his success
					to his memory of the songs and the information conveyed in them.

Tolkien often insisted that The Lord of the Rings was
					not an allegory—a symbolic or contemporary rendering of established
					tales and archetypes. Nevertheless, the mystical trip through the
					Paths of the Dead depicts Aragorn as a Christ figure, and the events
					of Chapter 2 as a whole reflect the Passion
					of Jesus Christ as portrayed in the Gospels. Traditionally, the
					early Christian church affirmed that Christ, after his death on
					the cross, descended into hell to redeem those believers who had
					already died and to preach to the lost souls held captive there.
					After doing so, Christ rose again on earth, eventually to ascend
					into heaven. Similarly, Aragorn descends into the underground Paths
					of the Dead, where he speaks to the animated spirits of the Dead.
					He leads the Dead out into the waking world, where they affirm their
					devotion to Aragorn, renouncing their broken promise to Isildur
					at the altar-like Stone of Erech. Like the Bible’s foreshadowing
					of Christ in the Old Testament, Elrohir’s secret message and the
					legendary song about the Paths of the Dead act as prophetic underpinnings
					for Aragorn’s deed; Aragorn himself has a keen sense of the ominous
					task that he “must” do. Moreover, Aragorn repeatedly affirms that
					his feats are accomplished not by heroic skill, but by divine right
					and by the strength of his will.

The presence of these biblical parallels does not mean
					that Tolkien misrepresented his intentions for The Lord
						of the Rings. The comparisons to Christ are far from a
					systematic allegory, and more than one character fits the role of
					a Christ figure in the trilogy. Gandalf also recalls Christ’s sacrifice
					and resurrection when he dies in Book II and returns in Book III
					as Gandalf the White, purified and godlike. Frodo and Sam perform
					additional sacrificial duties in their quest to save and redeem
					Middle-earth. Rather than create Christian parallels, Tolkien wanted
					to create in The Lord of the Rings an ancient mythology
					for contemporary England. The history of Middle-earth in the novel
					and in the tales of The Silmarillion depicts a pre-Christian
					world before the flowering of humankind’s dominance. As mythology, The
						Lord of the Rings promotes a specific moral and religious
					understanding, implying that the Christian principles of sacrifice,
					redemption, and forgiveness are central to the way the world is
					and has always worked—even before the appearance of Christianity
					as a religion.

