The Underground Man suddenly implies that everything he
has said in the last few chapters has all been a bitter joke. Nonetheless,
he continues to wonder if it is in man’s best interest to act for
his own profit. He admits that man feels a compulsion to create,
but that he feels an equally strong urge to destroy. Animals delight
in the creations they have made, as ants delight in an anthill they
have built. Man, on the other hand, takes pleasure only in the creative process, never
in its end result. Man senses that after he fully achieves all of his
goals, there will be nothing left to do, and so he fears that achievement.
To man, then, the full illumination that logic offers is alarming.

Then the Underground Man wonders whether suffering is
not just as valuable to mankind as the well-being achieved through
the use of reason. He states that suffering is the cause of consciousness. Though
he has complained about consciousness before, he thinks that consciousness
surpasses reason. Reason may solve all the world’s problems, but
then man is left with nothing to do. Consciousness renders man immobile,
but allows him to “occasionally whip” himself, which at least “livens
things up a bit.”

The Underground Man mocks the utopian fascination with
the idea of the crystal palace, an indestructible edifice that epitomizes
rationality. He fears the crystal palace because he is unable to
stick his tongue out at it. He then mentions that if the palace
were a chicken coop, he would use it for shelter, but never call
it a palace. If he desired a crystal palace, he would refuse to
accept anything less—such as the mundane accomodations of city life—than
that palace. If no one pays attention to his desires, he always
has the underground.

Suddenly, the Underground Man wants us to forget that
he rejected the crystal palace. He wonders if he was only upset
because he has nothing at which to stick out his tongue. He wonders
why he desires things like crystal palaces when he should be content
with apartments, thinking his desire might be some cruel hoax. He
thenremarks that those who live underground like him never stop
talking once they start, even though they have been silent for years.

The last chapter of the “Underground” section of the novel
begins with the Underground Man’s resolution that the “conscious
inertia” of the underground surpasses the life of the normal man.
Nonetheless, he continues to envy the normal man bitterly. In the
next moment, he declares that he is lying, and that in fact he believes nothing
of what he has written so far, even if at the time he thought that
he believed it. This statement is followed by a long speech by the Underground
Man’s imagined, outraged audience, who chastises him for his inconsistency,
his lack of integrity, his cowardice in refusing to stand by any
of his statements, and his general depravity.

The Underground Man responds that he has made up the audience’s
entire speech. He wonders if the audience is “indeed so gullible”
as to think that he will publish his notes and allow them to be read.
Then he wonders why he addresses the audience at all when he does
not plan to let them read the notes. He explains that the notes are
his attempt to confront those memories and thoughts that he has trouble
revealing even to himself. Addressing an audience is merely a formal
construction to help him to write. He decides that perhaps he uses
this imaginary audience because he is a coward, or else in order
to “behave more decently” while writing.

