In February of 2002, Mortenson is again in Pakistan. The U.S. action against
					Afghanistan has ended the rule of the Taliban and the Taliban’s repression of the
					Afghan people. Although Mortenson had been in favor of that war, he now worries
					about the many civilians who were killed or injured. In addition, the promised aid
					for rebuilding has not yet reached those in need. Mortenson travels to Kabul, where
					he learns that Uzra Faizad, a high-school principal, tries to teach 4,500 students
					with 90 teachers. None of these teachers has been paid for several months. Mortenson
					obtains permission from the CAI board to provide supplies for the students, and
					Julia Bergman, the librarian who works with the CAI, insists on traveling with him
					to distribute them, despite the danger. 

Back in America, Mortenson continues to speak out on the situation in Pakistan
					and Afghanistan. Representative Mary Bono is so impressed by one of his
					presentations that she arranges for him to speak to a group of other congressmen. A
					Marine general makes a contribution to the CAI and arranges for Mortenson to meet
					Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld. The meeting is very brief—Mortenson isn’t even
					offered a seat—and Mortenson mainly recalls Rumsfeld’s expensive, highly polished
					shoes. He receives an offer of funding from an unnamed government figure who
					suggests countering the rise in madrassas by creating more moderate
					schools to compete with them. But Mortenson feels his credibility in the region
					would be damaged if he were suspected of allying with the U.S. government. As the
					chapter ends, Mortenson wonders if his efforts are having any effect.

Kevin Fedarko, a reporter doing research for an article on high-altitude
					warfare, goes with Mortenson to a meeting in Korphe. Jahan, Haji’s grand-daughter,
					interrupts the meeting to remind Mortenson about his promise to help her, and
					Mortenson gives her tuition money for medical school. Fedarko is so impressed by
					this incident that he persuades Parade Magazine to run a cover
					story on Mortenson’s work. The story appears shortly after the American invasion of
					Iraq, and many readers view Mortenson’s work as an alternative to war. Donations to
					the CAI pour in. This new support allows Mortenson to give raises to the Pakistani
					employees and accept an increase in his own salary. He also rents an office for
					himself and hires a small staff. In addition, the money makes it possible to start
					new projects in Pakistan for students continuing their education. Another Pakistani
					cleric, however, has declared a fatwa against Mortenson and has partially destroyed
					one of the CAI schools. The case goes before a conservative Muslim court and not
					only is the fatwa lifted, but the cleric is ordered to pay for damages to the
					school. Mortenson meets with a powerful Pakistani official who seeks his advice on
					how best to spend government funds in the region. As the chapter ends, he visits
					Jahan, who tells him she now believes she can be a great woman.

Mortenson is on his way to the Wakhan Corridor (a thin arm of Afghanistan that
					runs alongside an area of northern Pakistan) to fulfill his promise to the Khirgiz
					chief who approached him in Zuudkhan. On a flight to Kabul, Mortenson meets the
					elderly Afghan king Zahir Shah, and the two discuss how American attention has
					turned away from Afghanistan to the war in Iraq. Mortenson tells Zahir Shah about
					his work, and the king suggests he see Sadhar Khan, a leader of the Afghan freedom
					fighters (mujahideen) who cares about the welfare of his people.
					After a harrowing journey that involves getting trapped in a dangerous tunnel and
					caught in a cross-fire between opium smugglers, Mortenson reaches Faizabad riding in
					the bed of a truck filled with rotting goatskins. He then makes his way to Baharak
					and finds Sadhar Khan. Khan knows of his work, and the two men begin discussing
					possible locations for schools. Khan explains that he wants to honor his fallen
					soldiers by building schools, and Mortenson realizes that his future will be about
					working on this new project.

Chapter 21 continues to show how Mortenson’s mission has changed from a
					little-known humanitarian project to an endeavor at the crossroads of world events.
					Mortenson was literally half a world away from the World Trade Center on 9/11, but
					he was very near the remote regions of Afghanistan where Osama bin Laden and his
					followers planned the destruction of the Twin Towers. Due to his experiences in
					Central Asia, Mortenson has a very different view of events than most Americans,
					since he knows that the majority of Muslims are not terrorists. He also understands
					how terrorist groups exploit the region’s poverty and lack of education to recruit
					soldiers. Yet his attempts to explain these realities to the public and to the
					government fall largely on deaf ears. Although there is now a worldwide focus on the
					region, we can see that it will pose new hardships for Mortenson’s work rather than
					bringing new aid. At the end of Chapter 21, as Mortenson prepares for his
					twenty-seventh trip to Pakistan, he wonders whether anyone is listening to him, and
					whether the frequent separations from his family are worthwhile. 

By this time, nearing the end of the book, we have accompanied Mortenson on
					his journey and can understand his point of view. Like Mortenson, we have gotten to
					know the people of Pakistan, so we share in his distress when he realizes that some
					of the civilians threatened by war may actually be CAI students and their families.
					Knowing how hard Mortenson has worked to stretch the CAI funds, we understand his
					frustration at seeing so much spent on warfare when it could have been spent
					providing people with education and opportunities. In addition to sharing
					Mortenson’s experience, we are also able to see it in a larger framework. When the
					events in these chapters occurred, Mortenson had no way of knowing how long the war
					in Iraq would last, or how much it would turn attention away from Afghanistan. As
					readers, we realize that the very things he worried about then are things that have
					actually happened since. That recognition gives these final chapters added
					poignancy.

In the last three chapters of the book, Mortenson’s financial fortunes change,
					but his situation becomes more, rather than less, complicated. Mortenson has
					struggled for years with little money, sharing in a way the poverty of those he was
					helping. Then, in Chapter 21, the American government offers him a huge amount of
					money. He decides, however, he would lose his credibility in the region by accepting
					it. Then, in Chapter 22, he gains an unexpected financial support from the public,
					providing him the opportunity to reward his helpers, upgrade his operations, and
					undertake new projects. But the more resources he has, the more there is to do. We
					see in Chapter 23 that money cannot solve some problems. Mortenson’s journey to the
					Wakhan Corridor is as difficult and dangerous as anything he had ever attempted
					before, and we realize that the challenges ahead of him will be greater than any
					he’s faced before.

In Chapter 23, Mortenson switches his personal commitment from Haji Ali, the
					chief of a small village, to Sadhar Khan, the formidable leader of a fighting force.
					This change completes the dramatic shift that has taken place between the beginning
					of the book and the end. Mortenson’s harrowing trip to the Wakhan corridor in
					Chapter 23 is as challenging and life-threatening as his descent from K2 had been,
					and when he arrives at his destination, he must once again follow his instincts. He
					must choose whether to trust Sadhar Khan, a man with a violent past. Yet Mortenson
					recognizes in this warrior the next phase of the mission he had begun with Haji. By
					comparing the two men, Relin makes us recognize how much the world has changed since
					Mortenson first stumbled into Korphe. Looking back, we see that Korphe’s isolation
					from the world was in some ways a blessing, as Mortenson realized when he
					contemplated building the bridge. 

