Though Martha seldom mentions deep friendships in her diary, she relies
				heavily upon her connections to people in her community. One of the most
				significant elements in her diary is her chronicle of neighbors she visits with
				and those who visit her. The interaction itself, not the reason for the visit,
				is what matters to Martha, and sometimes she makes no mention of why the visit
				takes place. Her midwifery is the greatest example and facilitator of these
				connections, giving a wide variety of people a reason to reach out to Martha and
				ask her for help. Martha is a popular midwife, and her delivering and nursing
				take her to most of the community. When the Purrinton murders strike the
				community, Martha focuses on the neighbors’ actions instead of on the crime
				itself and describes how together they deal with the dead and help the survivor.
				When Martha becomes increasingly homebound, her isolation from the rest of the
				community bothers her a great deal, and she begins deliberately passing along
				the produce from her garden in an effort to reach out to the community once
				again.

Though contact with others is vital for Martha, she also needs to maintain
				authority over her own life. Midwifery gives Martha the chance to make her own
				decisions, spend considerable time away from home, and work with only the eyes
				of the community as supervision. Unlike most jobs available to women, midwifery
				provides a salary equal to her husband’s and the chance to manage it
				independently, both of which help Martha gain a greater autonomy in her
				marriage. Martha clashes with the local doctors only when they try to deny her
				ability to make intelligent, skilled decisions on her own, and though she
				acknowledges their skills, she does her best to avoid working with them.
				Martha’s need for autonomy also contributes to making the later years of her
				life difficult. Without the responsibility and constructive effort of midwifery,
				she feels she has lost the ability to control her own life.

