Daphne is embarrassed to realize that Simon (whose identity she doesn’t yet know) has witnessed the indecorous scene between her and Berbrooke. Daphne explains the situation to Simon and wonders what they should do with the motionless Berbrooke, since she doesn’t want anyone else to see what has happened. Simon is impressed by Daphne’s composure and feels the sudden urge to kiss her but doesn’t act on his impulse. Simon agrees to help her get rid of Berbrooke, telling her to wait in the library and that he will bring around his carriage. But Berbrooke starts to wake up and calls Daphne by her name, which Simon recognizes as the name of his friend Anthony’s sister. Simon then introduces himself to Daphne, and Daphne tells him that she has been warned about his notoriously rakish ways. As the two are talking, Berbrooke manages to get up and, and he throws himself at Daphne. This leads Simon to hit Berbrooke, knocking him out for the second time. Simon and Daphne decide to just leave Berbrooke where he is before parting ways.

Simon enters the ballroom and is dismayed when the mothers of the unmarried women attending the ball rush to introduce Simon to their daughters. Simon eventually wriggles free of them and joins the three Bridgerton brothers, Anthony, Benedict, and Colin. The men notice Lady Bridgerton and Daphne in a conversation with Earl Macclesfield, and Simon can tell that Daphne is miserable. When Simon mentions Daphne by name, the Bridgerton brothers are all surprised that Simon has already met her. Simon is about to leave when Lady Bridgerton and Daphne join them. Simon introduces himself and charms Lady Bridgerton, after which she is no longer concerned with his rakish reputation. Seeing t that other women are about to approach him, Simon asks Daphne to dance so he can avoid talking to them.

The qualities that distinguish a person from their peers may also make that person attractive to others. When Daphne punches Nigel Berbrooke but also wants to make sure he’s okay, she displays a combination of confidence and kindness that surprises Simon. He’s clearly physically attracted to her, though his thought that they could be friends if she weren’t a woman shows that he’s interested in more than just her appearance. As the other young ladies at the party throw themselves at Simon, Daphne proves that she is far from typical when she laughs in his face and claims she’s immune to his charms. Simon’s status as an outsider in London society works to attract Daphne as well. While other young ladies and their mothers are drawn to Simon’s wealth and title, Daphne is intrigued because she hasn’t met him before. Both Daphne and Simon are different from their society peers, and their differences make them intriguing to each other.

These chapters also introduce the idea that present actions have the power to overcome past reputation. Though Simon arrives in London with a reputation as a womanizer, he himself debates whether or not he deserves the notoriety. Simon engages in witty flirting with Daphne and gets frustrated with her indecision, but when he helps her handle Berbrooke, he proves that he is willing to defend her honor. While he acknowledges his role as a rake and thinks about kissing Daphne, his choice to battle his temptation suggests Simon possesses hidden depths; he is an honorable character. When Simon realizes that Daphne is a Bridgerton, he demonstrates respect for his bond with Anthony when he tempers his lust for her, and his decision to leave out the details of his initial meeting with Daphne indicates a desire to be honorable. Simon’s warm welcome by Daphne’s previously skeptical mother ultimately illustrates his ability to present a persona built not on his past but on present behavior.

