The male tribute from District 12, Peeta is in love with Katniss and becomes
				her main ally and romantic interest during the Games. Peeta is best characterized by
				his love for Katniss and willingness to sacrifice himself for her. Katniss’s first
				memory of him, for instance, is from an incident years before the Games in which
				Peeta willingly risked a beating to help her. Katniss was starving and searching for
				food behind Peeta’s family’s bakery, and Peeta apparently burned two loaves of bread
				deliberately so the bakery couldn’t use them, then gave those loaves to Katniss.
				Peeta’s mother hit him for burning the bread, and Katniss believes Peeta must have
				known he would be punished for it. During the Games, he is similarly selfless when
				he saves Katniss after she comes back to retrieve the bow but finds herself suddenly
				stunned by the tracker jacker stings. To allow Katniss to escape, Peeta fights Cato,
				the most deadly of the other tributes, and suffers a serious injury as a
				result.

Though we have a limited perspective on Peeta since we only seen him through
				Katniss’s eyes, he comes across as thoughtful, artistic, and genuinely kind. We
				learn that he’s a gifted visual artist, capable of creating beautiful designs in
				frosting for the cakes at his family’s bakery and mimicking patterns of light and
				shade when he camouflages himself. When Haymitch falls in his own vomit, it is Peeta
				who volunteers to clean him up. Katniss wonders what his motive is in volunteering
				for this task, then realizes that Peeta is just being nice. In one particularly
				memorable scene before the Games occur, Peeta confesses to Katniss that his only
				hope for the Games is to retain his identity and not to be made into a monster by
				his circumstances. The incident reveals Peeta to be a good and introspective person
				who prides his dignity and decency perhaps above all else. (It is never answered
				whether he would sacrifice that for Katniss as well.)

