The protagonist of the novel. When Robin Hood is eighteen years old, his pride and quick temper lead him to accidentally kill a man on his way to an archery competition. Though he tries to evade the law, Robin is plagued by guilt, and he vows to help the less fortunate by taking from the greedy and corrupt. Having made a home in Sherwood Forest on the run from the law, Robin Hood becomes the leader of a band of outlaws. He takes great pleasure in the company of his friends and in getting into mischief, often tricking others while in disguise. Robin is a skilled archer and escapes law enforcement through clever schemes, but often endangers himself due to his pride and conceit. While of generous spirit, Robin Hood is quick to make assumptions and is often hypocritical. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Robin Hood.

Robin Hood’s right-hand man. His name is an ironic reference to his height because he is very tall. Though Little John enjoys life in Sherwood Forest with Robin Hood and the other men, he is often tempted by a life of leisure and creature comforts, a fault that can lead him astray from certain tasks. Still, his loyalty to Robin Hood always wins out. Like Robin, Little John enjoys going on adventures while dressed in disguise and making new friends.

Read an in-depth analysis of Little John.

The antagonist of the novel. The Sheriff is determined to arrest Robin Hood following the death of the forester, to whom he is related. The Sheriff is motivated by both power and personal vendetta. Like other authority figures in the novel, the Sheriff is often portrayed as corrupt, using his position to acquire wealth at all possible opportunities. Though the Sheriff is committed to capturing Robin Hood, he remains fearful of the famous outlaw throughout his reign over Nottingham.

Read an in-depth analysis of the Sheriff of Nottingham.

A member of Robin Hood’s band and one of his closest confidantes. The story of how Will Stutely came to join Robin Hood is never shared, though Will accompanies Robin for most of his adventures. Will is devoutly loyal to Robin Hood, nearly dying for him after being captured by the Sheriff.

Robin Hood’s nephew and a member of his band. Like Robin Hood, Will Scarlet is on the run from the law after accidentally killing a man and has disguised himself in fancy clothing when he and Robin first meet. Though Robin mocks Will’s outfit and believes him to be a corrupt member of the upper class, he accepts Will as part of his inner circle upon learning his identity.

A harpist who becomes part of Robin Hood’s band. Allan brings merriment to the group with his music and becomes one of Robin’s most trusted friends.

A friar who becomes part of Robin Hood’s band. Friar Tuck is contrasted with other members of the clergy in the novel because he does not display any of their greed or corruption. Instead, he enjoys nature and longs to see the happiness of others without judging anyone.

A knight who pledges loyalty to Robin Hood after being a benefactor of Robin’s generosity. When Sir Richard first meets Robin Hood, he has lost all his wealth and lands, but he gets them back with Robin’s help. Sir Richard is then inspired to bestow kindness on others and to save Robin Hood later.

The wealthiest bishop in England and one of Robin Hood’s antagonists. The bishop exemplifies the wealth and greed that Robin Hood considers inherent in men of the clergy. The bishop fears and detests Robin and convinces King Henry to arrest him despite the promise the king made to his wife.

A high-ranking member of the clergy. The Prior of Emmet is extremely greedy and takes pleasure in getting possession of Sir Richard’s lands. 

The king of England for most of the novel. King Henry is frustrated by the Sheriff of Nottingham’s failure to capture Robin Hood and spends much of his reign desiring Robin’s arrest.

King Henry’s wife and the queen of England for most of the novel. Queen Eleanor feels sympathy for Robin Hood and enjoys tricking and frustrating her husband by inviting Robin to participate in an archery match.

The page of Queen Eleanor, who warns Robin Hood of the king’s guards.

The king of England who succeeds King Henry. He is much more sympathetic to Robin Hood and his band of outlaws, whom he enlists to work for him.

