Sounds of the ocean and activity onboard a boat can be
					heard. In darkness, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern wonder where they
					are, eventually realizing that they are on a ship at sea. Hamlet
					lights a lantern in the background of the stage, revealing Rosencrantz
					and Guildenstern sitting in the foreground. The light grows, and
					three large barrels can be seen onstage, as well as an enormous
					overturned umbrella, shading from view whatever is behind it. Rosencrantz
					and Guildenstern discuss what to do, deciding on nothing, and Guildenstern
					says that he enjoys being on boats because of the sensation that one
					is simultaneously free and restricted.

Rosencrantz walks upstage and peers behind the umbrella.
					He quietly returns to Guildenstern and tells him that Hamlet is
					asleep. At a loss for what to do, Guildenstern grows frustrated,
					and Rosencrantz attempts to console him. He asks Guildenstern to
					guess which of his hands contains a coin. Guildenstern guesses correctly several
					times in a row before realizing that Rosencrantz has been putting
					coins in both hands in an effort to please him. They ask each other
					how much money they received from Claudius, and Guildenstern gets
					irritated as Rosencrantz simply repeats what he says. When Rosencrantz
					winces under Guildenstern’s anger and begins to despair over their
					fate, Guildenstern comforts him and tells him that everything will
					turn out fine. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern try to decide what to
					do when they meet with the English king, and they recall that Claudius
					has given them a letter. Unable to remember who has the letter,
					Guildenstern suddenly reveals that he has been carrying it. Rosencrantz
					says that he does not believe in England and cannot fathom what
					they are going to do there.

Rosencrantz and Guildenstern act out what will happen
					when they arrive and meet the English king. In the course of their
					play-acting, Rosencrantz opens the letter and discovers that it
					asks the English king to execute Hamlet. Somewhat dumbstruck, Rosencrantz
					tries to suggest that they cannot carry through with their mission
					as they are friends with Hamlet and he has done nothing to deserve
					being put to death. Guildenstern, however, rationalizes away any
					guilty hesitation on Rosencrantz’s part by suggesting that there
					is more at work than they realize and that there might be good reasons
					for Hamlet to die of which they are unaware. Guildenstern also refers
					to the Greek philosopher Socrates, who pointed out that since we
					do not know what happens at death, fearing death is irrational.
					Guildenstern quickly sums up all of the action of the play and declares
					that they have got a handle on things. As he finishes, Hamlet rises
					and blows out the lantern, plunging the stage into darkness.

Beneath the light of the moon, Hamlet approaches the sleeping Rosencrantz
					and Guildenstern. He takes the letter and retires behind the umbrella.
					He returns and places a letter back in the original spot.

Hamlet acts as a foil, or opposite, to Rosencrantz and
					Guildenstern. Unlike his friends, Hamlet does not seem confused
					by the incomprehensibility of the world, nor does he have trouble
					making choices or deciding how to act. In fact, Hamlet has a lot
					of power within the play, as symbolized by his lantern. He lights
					the scene, then plunges the scene into darkness. His ability to
					control what viewers see signifies his immense power. He changes
					and affects people’s lives in ways that Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
					cannot. For example, he kills Polonius, then disposes of the body.
					When Hamlet speaks, he frequently confuses other characters with
					riddles, another sign of his ability to have an effect on people.
					In this section of Act III, Hamlet reads the letter ordering his
					execution in England. But he reads it offstage and silently, masking
					whatever emotion he might be feeling about his friends’ betrayal.
					Unlike Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, Hamlet acts decisively. Regardless
					of whether he is actually insane, Hamlet’s cool, rational behavior
					stands in contrast to the dopey, bewildered demeanor exhibited by
					Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

When thoroughly confused by their circumstances, Rosencrantz and
					Guildenstern usually resort to gambling, which soothes and comforts
					them. Rather than figure out what they are doing on the boat or
					where they are headed, their first instinct is to gamble, a familiar
					pattern from Acts I and II. Rosencrantz tries to make Guildenstern
					feel better about their situation by letting him win the coin each
					time, an echo of the opening of Act I, when Rosencrantz won coin
					after coin from Guildenstern. In times of stress, both characters embrace
					gambling, which represents chance and limitless possibility. But,
					even as they enjoy betting on games like coin flipping, they rail
					against the randomness of reality. They hate the way people appear
					and ask them to do things, but neither Rosencrantz nor Guildenstern
					tries to do anything to exert control over his own life or fate.
					Instead, they constantly surrender to passivity, preferring to simply
					let things happen. They would rather gamble than make a choice or
					commit to an action, gravitating toward the very thing—chance—that
					most confuses them.

As everyman figures, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern stand
					in for humanity as a whole. Their plight represents the individual’s
					struggle to derive meaning and significance from a life that will
					end in the complete nothingness of death, a philosophical idea known
					as existentialism. But, unlike real people, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern lack
					imaginative power and memory. For instance, Rosencrantz cannot imagine
					England. He tells Guildenstern that he cannot picture himself leaving
					the ship or speaking to the king. In short, Rosencrantz cannot imagine
					the future. But neither he nor Guildenstern remembers who has the
					letter for the English king. As in Act I, they decide to assume
					roles and act in order to discover or remember something. They cannot
					imagine a future, but neither can they recall the past. Rosencrantz
					and Guildenstern exist solely in a never-ending present, a state
					of mind that partly explains their constant confusion. They cannot
					learn from their mistakes, nor can they conceive of acting in any
					way other than what they have done before. When confused, they gamble
					or role-play. Each moment exists separately from the one that came
					before or the one that is to come, so that Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
					are constantly being surprised by their situations.

