Pedro Luna, Antonio’s uncle, takes Antonio, his mother,
					his sisters, and Ultima to the Luna farms to help with the harvest.
					They stop first at the home of María’s father, Prudencio Luna. Afterward,
					they settle into the home of one of María’s brothers, Juan Luna,
					because it is his turn to host his sister and her children. Antonio
					overhears Juan urge María to send Antonio to them for a summer before
					Antonio is “lost” like his older brothers.

That fall, Antonio begins school. When Ultima blesses
					him, he again feels a whirlwind sweeping around him. He recalls
					the evil whirlwinds on the llano, which he has been taught to ward
					off with the sign of the cross, and wonders why he feels the same
					whirlwind in Ultima’s presence. Reflecting on this similarity, Antonio
					wonders if the powers of good and evil are the same. María presses
					Ultima to name Antonio’s fate. Ultima replies sadly that Antonio
					will be “a man of learning.” In his first day, Antonio
					learns to write his name, much to his teacher’s pleasure. However,
					the class first laughs at him because he cannot speak English and
					because he eats green chili in tortillas for lunch. Feeling like
					an outcast, Antonio begins eating lunch with other children whose
					language and customs are different.

The war ends, and Antonio dreams of three giants, his
					brothers. They ask for his “saving hand” because they are dying.
					Antonio wakes just in time to greet his brothers upon their return.

Antonio’s brothers spend the winter sleeping all day and
					spending their money on women and drink. All three of them suffer
					trauma from the war. Their parents say that they have “war-sickness.”
					In the spring, the brothers are restless to build their own independent lives,
					resisting Gabriel’s urgings to follow his old dream of moving to
					California with them.

Antonio dreams that his three brothers urge him to enter
					Rosie’s brothel. Antonio calls out that he must resist because he
					might become a priest. His brothers León and Eugene predict that
					he will eventually enter the brothel. Antonio begs Andrew to stay
					outside. Andrew promises not to enter until Antonio loses his innocence. Antonio
					hears the voices of a priest and María, who say that innocence lasts
					only until understanding. Antonio hears Ultima call out that his
					innocence is in the lonely llano. Antonio awakes to hear his brothers
					arguing with their parents. The brothers want to leave the family
					and strike out on their own. León and Eugene leave the next morning,
					but Andrew stays behind.

	Andrew walks Antonio to school. The Vitamin Kid beats
					them in a race, calling Antonio a giant killer. At the end of the
					year, Antonio’s teacher, Miss Maestas, promotes him from first to
					third grade. After school, Antonio goes fishing with Samuel, the
					Vitamin Kid’s brother. Samuel asks if Antonio has ever fished for
					carp. Antonio replies that he hasn’t because to do so is bad luck.
					Samuel tells Antonio a story that Jasón’s Indian originally told.
					The story says that the gods sent the first people to the valley
					but forbade them to eat the carp. During a terrible drought, the
					people disobeyed the rule. One god pleaded for mercy, so the gods
					turned the people into carp instead of killing them. The
					god who saved the people grew sad, so he became a carp as well.
					However, he is larger than the other carp and golden in color. The
					story explains why eating carp is a sin. Samuel says that Cico,
					a local boy, will take Antonio to see the golden carp. When Antonio
					returns home, María is angry that he is so late. When she learns
					of his double promotion, however, she quickly forgets it.

Ultima’s prediction that Antonio will be a “man of learning”
					shows that her conception of learning is broader than that of some
					of the other characters. Her prediction is not necessarily a confirmation that
					Antonio will fulfill María’s hope that he become a priest. Her answer
					actually draws from a comment she makes earlier in the novel, when
					Antonio is trying to make sense of Lupito’s death and Ultima tells
					him that the ways of men are hard to learn. She seems to believe
					every man is a “man of learning” because acquiring life experiences
					is in itself a learning process. Ultima’s sadness may simply result
					from her awareness that Antonio will face difficult times or from
					a sense that his mother may misinterpret her prediction.


Bless Me, Ultima is largely focused
					on the difficulty of reconciling cultural differences, and Antonio’s
					entrance into school demonstrates one more way in which this difficulty
					pervades his life. There, he must address the conflict between Anglo
					and Chicano cultures, yet another set of identities for him to deal
					with along with the Spanish/indigenous and Luna/vaquero identities.
					Language plays a large role in his identity conflict at school,
					where his alienation is intense because he does not speak English.
					Anaya suggests, however, that even if he did, he would be unable
					to avoid confrontation with Anglo arrogance. Antonio struggles with
					his feelings of hurt and even resentment at his mother for sending
					him to school, another indication that Antonio is growing away from
					his childhood dependence on his mother. Coping with these feelings
					is basically the process of coping with change.

	Antonio’s dream in Chapter 7,
					in which his brothers are three giants who ask for his “saving hand,”
					is open to many metaphorical interpretations, all of which address
					Antonio’s gradual entrance into adolescence. The dream could mean
					that Antonio is reluctant to give up his innocent, childish idea
					that his brothers are infallible and unchanging. It could also mean
					that they are dying because they have changed too much to settle
					seamlessly into their old lives. When they do arrive, they are restless
					and aimless. Finally, León and Eugene decide to build independent
					lives elsewhere. The dream also reveals Antonio’s awareness that
					the people he loves can sin despite his attempts to save them. Antonio
					also has difficulty coping with the idea that his brothers are men,
					not boys who will stay home with their mother.

	Although Antonio loves to learn, his dream about the
					brothel reveals his anxiety about the morality of desiring knowledge.
					In this dream, he clearly associates knowledge of the flesh with
					sin. Antonio’s refusal to enter the brothel on the grounds that
					he may someday want to become a priest results from his anxieties
					over whether not fulfilling his mother’s wishes is immoral. In other
					words, he wonders if it is a sin not to fulfill her wishes. Anaya
					begins to link some of the thematic anxieties that have troubled
					the novel’s characters from the beginning: growing up, becoming
					independent from one’s parents, learning, and finding a clear moral
					framework in which to live one’s life. Seen within the context of
					cultural identity, these concerns lie at the heart of Bless
						Me, Ultima and become increasingly pressing on Antonio
					as he grows older and is forced to make independent judgments more
					regularly.

	At the same time that the novel intensifies its treatment
					of conflicting cultural identities, it begins to resolve Antonio’s
					concern about growing older and leaving his mother. Although he
					spends much of the first several chapters of the book anxious about
					leaving his mother, once he actually arrives at school, Antonio
					solidifies his fragile new independence by forming relationships
					outside of his family. Some friends, like the Vitamin Kid, simply
					provide him with boyish fun. Others, like Samuel, are mentors as
					well as friends. Although Antonio suffers during the initial stages
					of developing a life independent of his mother, by the end of his
					first year of school, he begins to make decisions for himself. He
					demonstrates this self-awareness by choosing to go fishing with
					Samuel rather than returning home after school.

	Once he has firmly acted on his new independence, he
					is ready to be exposed to an alternate religious view—the legend
					of the golden carp that Samuel tells him. The legend of the golden
					carp contains the same kind of moral themes contained in Catholic
					theology. The story involves sin, punishment, and forgiveness. Antonio’s
					open mind allows him to realize that both religions represent different ways
					of making sense of the same issues of life, death, good, and evil. Just
					as Antonio realizes Catholicism’s limits in understanding Ultima’s
					power, he realizes that other religions are equally valid forms
					of knowledge about moral issues. Like Ultima’s worldview, each religion
					simply provides a different set of principles and icons that people
					can use to understand the basic issues that define existence.

