When Antonio wakes, he ponders the fate of Lupito’s soul
					and those of the men who killed him. He thinks that, according to
					Catholic principles, Lupito must be in hell because Lupito died
					having committed a mortal sin. He hopes that God will forgive Lupito,
					but he thinks sadly that God does not forgive anyone. He wonders
					whether the water of the river will carry Lupito’s soul away.

	Antonio lies in bed and listens to his parents quarrel.
					Their frequent Sunday morning arguments about religion are a result
					of Gabriel’s Saturday night drinking. María is a devout Catholic,
					but Gabriel’s vaquero mindset causes him to distrust priests because
					to him they stand for order and civilization. Antonio knows that
					Gabriel’s father once dragged a priest from church and beat him
					after the priest preached against something that Antonio’s grandfather
					had done. At last Antonio goes downstairs, and María scolds Antonio for
					not being properly formal when greeting Ultima. Ultima requests
					that María not scold Antonio, as the night was hard on all the men
					in town. María protests that Antonio is still a baby. She says that
					she thinks it is a sin for boys to become men. Gabriel hotly declares
					that it is not a sin, only the way of the world, and María argues
					that life corrupts the innocence and purity that God bequeaths to
					children. She says bitterly that if Antonio becomes a priest, he
					will be spared from the corruption of life. Gabriel pours coffee
					for Ultima, and Antonio realizes with some surprise that Gabriel
					and Ultima are the only grown-ups he knows who eat or drink before
					taking Communion on Sundays.

	Many women in town are dressed in mourning because they
					have lost sons and husbands in the war. Antonio notes that the war
					has indirectly claimed two more victims: Chávez’s brother and Lupito. Antonio
					lingers near his mother, who smoothes his hair, and he feels soothed
					by her presence. He feels another jolt of anxiety when he realizes
					again that when he starts school soon, he will have to leave her.
					Antonio and Ultima discuss the events of the previous night. Antonio
					asks Ultima how his father can take Communion if he committed the
					sin of firing at Lupito. Ultima replies that she doesn’t think Gabriel
					fired at Lupito, but she warns that no one should presume to decide
					whom God does and does not forgive. On the way to the church, the
					family passes a brothel situated in a ramshackle mansion that belongs
					to a woman named Rosie. María makes her children bow their heads
					as they pass, and Antonio realizes that Rosie is evil, but evil
					in a different way from a witch. Before mass, Antonio mingles with
					the other boys. As they play, they discuss the night’s events. One
					of the boys brags that his father saw Lupito kill the sheriff. Antonio
					says nothing about Lupito’s death.

Antonio’s thoughts and actions in this chapter indicate
					a new obsession with sin and punishment. Ultima acts as a mentor
					to Antonio, guiding his inexperienced mind through new adult terrain.
					For example, her explanation that the men of the llano will not
					kill without reason is an attempt to address Antonio’s curiosity
					regarding the morality of murder. Ultima also tries to teach Antonio
					a larger moral lesson regarding salvation and damnation. Her suggestion that
					people must make independent moral decisions but should not make
					decisions regarding salvation and damnation introduces into the
					novel the idea that morality is not absolute. Ultima uses Catholic terms
					in her explanations to Antonio because Antonio is trying to make
					sense of Lupito’s death within a Catholic framework.

	One sign that Antonio is leaving his childhood behind
					is his realization that the grown-ups he loves and trusts can make
					mistakes. Narciso and Gabriel’s failed attempt to save Lupito, as
					well as the triumph of Chavez’s and the others’ blind anger and
					fear, forces Antonio to confront the fact that good intentions and
					good actions do not always achieve their desired results. As Antonio’s
					mentor, Ultima does not tell him what to think; rather, she tells
					him how people like his father and Narciso make moral decisions.
					Her approach gives Antonio the freedom to apply his understanding
					to his own decisions. Ultima’s style of teaching implies that she
					is more interested in helping Antonio develop into an independent
					person than in teaching him any particular moral outlook on life.

	María’s and Gabriel’s opinions regarding the transition
					between childhood and adolescence are based on the issues of sin
					and punishment that preoccupy Antonio. His mother associates growing
					up with learning how to sin, while Gabriel and Ultima view growing
					up as an inevitable process that is not good or bad in itself. María’s worldview
					results from a primarily religious outlook on life, but Gabriel
					and Ultima’s embodies a natural outlook. As a boy becomes a man,
					he uses his experiences and his knowledge to make decisions. The
					pressures that accompany each of these outlooks flare up when the
					subject of Antonio’s future comes up yet again. María’s religiosity
					leads her to the conclusion that the only hope for Antonio’s salvation
					lies in his becoming a priest, while Gabriel’s love of independence
					causes him to insist that no one but Antonio should decide whether
					he becomes a priest. His response reveals both his belief that meddling
					in another’s destiny is wrong and his aversion for priests. María,
					as a staunch Catholic, supports meddling in Antonio’s future as
					much as possible because the state of his soul is at stake. She
					also fears Antonio’s inevitable maturation for precisely the reasons
					that Ultima seeks to guide him: because he will start making his
					own decisions soon and will no longer constantly look to her for
					guidance.

