One of the three blood brothers, owner of the Bowl-a-Rama, and descendent of Ann Hawkins. Cal is a practical man, driven by duty to his family and town, haunted by the events of his 10th birthday, which set off the Seven. He has the ability to see into the past. As he begins to fall for Quinn, he gets closer to solving the mystery of how to stop the Seven.

A writer on paranormal events and descendent of Hester Deale and Lazarus Twisse. An expert on mysterious events, Quinn goes to Hawkins Hollow to write a book about the Seven. She is a fiery, focused, courageous woman, with an iron will (except when it comes to junk food). Her investigation into the Seven becomes increasingly personal when she starts to see horrific things that the rest of the town cannot. As she falls for Cal, she also learns that her ancestors were part of the events that started the Seven, centuries ago.

One of the three blood brothers and lawyer in Hawkins Hollow. He has stayed in Hawkins Hollow with Cal, attempting as much as possible to protect the town from the Seven. Fox has the ability to read people’s minds.

A shopkeeper from New York and descendent of Hester Deale and Lazarus Twisse. After a series of terrible dreams, Layla finds herself mysteriously drawn to Hawkins Hollow. She drives to the town from New York without a clear sense of why she’s there. Quinn takes her under her wing after she notices that Layla can see the strange events, too. Quinn and Fox convince her to stay in Hawkins Hollow and fight the Big evil. Like Fox, she has the ability to see deeply into the present moment.

One of the three blood brothers, a wanderlust and gambler. Gage spends his time traveling the world, learning about paranormal events, in an attempt to understand how to stop the Seven. A gruff and no-nonsense man, he has the ability to see the future.

An expert researcher, Quinn’s close friend, and a descendent of Hester Deale and Lazarus Twisse. Like Gage, Cybil is blunt and to-the-point. She also shares his ability to see into the future, a power that becomes stronger when Gage and Cybil are together.

Ann Hawkins’ love and the father of her triplets. Giles is burned by Twisse for practicing witchcraft but seems to, in some mysterious way, survive the fire. As he burns, he takes the demon inside of Twisse with him into the flames, trapping the demon inside the Pagan Stone until Cal, Fox, and Gage release it. He foresees, even before his battle with Twisse, that three of his descendants will slay the demon.

Giles Dent’s lover, the mother of the triplets, and Cal’s ancestor. Ann Hawkins flees the site of Twisse’s attack on Dent, saving the triplets and creating the Hawkins family line. Ann frequently visits her descendants to try and help them battle the demon.

The zealot leader of a religious sect in 1652. In the beginning of the novel, Twisse, possessed by a demon, accuses Giles and Ann of witchcraft and burns their home to the ground. At the last moment, Dent pulls the demon from Twisse’s body into the fire.

A young woman who drowns herself after being raped by the demon. Twisse also coerces her into testifying that Giles and Ann performed witchcraft on her. After giving birth to a daughter, Hester drowns herself in the pond, which is then named after her. Hester visits her descendants, delivering mysterious messages.

Cal’s father and the owner of the Bowl-a-Rama.

Cal’s mother and a skillful homemaker.

Cal’s grandmother and the town librarian.

Fox’s invaluable assistant at the law firm, who quits her job and plans to flee Hawkins Hollow before the Seven.

Cal’s beloved dog, who is very loyal but not very bright.

