One night, a stranger appears in the family’s camp and
					introduces himself as Eliphaz, the eldest son of Esau. He reports
					that Esau is coming with his brothers, wives, and bondsmen to greet
					Jacob and his family. Jacob, who had been planning to divide his
					family and move in two directions so that Esau could not destroy
					them all in one attack, worries. He now must wait for Esau’s arrival,
					since the river behind them bars any escape. Jacob directs the family
					to put on their finest attire and offers Eliphaz beer and food.
					Before long, Esau appears with his family behind him. Jacob and
					Esau walk out to greet each other alone. Jacob bows low to Esau
					and greets him as a slave would a master, but Esau pulls him up
					and hugs him tight to his chest. Jacob offers many sheep and goats
					as offerings to his brother, and they introduce the two families
					to one another, with Jacob carefully differentiating his wives. 

Dinah spies a girl her height among Esau’s children. The
					two girls become fast friends by telling each other stories about
					their respective families. Tabea mentions that the women of her
					clan do not celebrate the new moon in the red tent, because their
					shared grandmother Rebecca, the Oracle of Mamre disapproves of the
					red tent. Dinah tells Tabea about the world inside the red tent,
					including the songs, cakes, and stories contained therein. The two
					girls speculate about who will reach womanhood first. Tabea proclaims
					she wants no children, since she has seen many women die in childbirth. Instead
					she would prefer to serve at Mamre or sing at a great altar. 

The two families enjoy a large evening meal together at
					which Esau and Jacob tell stories. The men begin singing, and soon
					the women and children join in. The next day, Jacob rejects his
					brother’s offer to join him on his lands and chooses instead to
					find his own lands for his family to make their fortune. Tabea and
					Dinah kiss goodbye, knowing they will see each to again soon at
					their grandmother Rebecca’s tent for the barley festival. The next
					day, Jacob finds a spot of land he likes near Succoth and declares
					it their new home. 

Dinah has trouble adjusting to the daily routines of life
					after the longs months of travel. She begins to do more baking and
					brewing, graduates from spinning to weaving, and is given charge
					of the bondswomen’s children. In the meantime, Judah, Simon, and
					Levi all marry. One morning, a woman’s voice is heard in their camp, calling
					for the wives of Jacob. It is a messenger from Jacob’s mother Rebecca,
					calling them all to the barley festival. The messenger has a silvery
					dress and red hair, and her name is Werenro. Werenro rests in their
					camp and joins them for the evening meal. She sings a beautiful and
					memorable song to them about the beginning of the world. After dinner,
					the women begin to plan for the trip to Mamre.

Jacob reunites with Esau, assuaging his fears. As the
					two families meet each other, Dinah begins to understand how her
					father perceives the women in the family. Against all expectations,
					Esau is warm, welcoming, and ecstatic at reuniting with his brother.
					Inna laughs to herself at Jacob’s foolishness, though his wives
					wisely keep silent. For the first time, Dinah hears the distinction
					between Jacob’s wives voiced publicly. Jacob introduces his family
					to Esau one by one, calling Leah and Rachel his wives and Zilpah,
					“Leah’s girl,” and Bilhah, “Rachel’s handmaid.” Dinah notices that
					the heads of the women’s sons drop to hear their mothers so named,
					and she becomes more aware of her favored status both as the sole
					daughter of Jacob and the child of his first wife, Leah. She finds
					many girls among Esau’s children but reminds herself that she is
					the daughter of Jacob, the favored son. In the weeks since their
					journey from Haran began, Dinah has continued to create an independent
					identity for herself. She has developed a strong sense of pride
					and distances herself from the young girls who follow after their
					mothers

Dinah’s introduction to her cousin Tabea opens her eyes
					to a new and disparate world of women’s rituals and beliefs. She
					is shocked to learn that Tabea’s family does not honor the women’s
					practices in the red tent. As she explains the ritual of marking
					the new moon, Dinah realizes its significance in her life and thinks
					of how fortunate she feels to participate in her mothers’ traditions.
					She feels pity for Tabea, whose mothers do not celebrate together
					and who are disliked by their grandmother. As a result, Dinah’s
					growing sense of superiority further increases. Tabea’s proclamation
					that she does not plan to have children shocks Dinah. Schooled in
					the ways of her family, Dinah cannot imagine a life for herself
					in which children do not surround her. Since she has already begun
					to learn the skills of healing and midwifery from Rachel, she feels
					attracted to the power of women to carry and bear life and knows
					that childbearing lies in her future. Though they are the same age,
					Dinah feels wiser than Tabea and more knowledgeable about the life
					of women.

Werenro, a fictional creation of Diamant’s, has a tremendous impact
					on Dinah. Werenro is the first woman she has met who is not a wife
					or mother, but instead she is a servant to her grandmother and a
					symbol of the power of the matriarch of her family. Werenro’s exotic
					red hair and position as messenger seem entirely foreign to Dinah,
					and she cannot help but want to know more about this woman who wears
					the pierced earring of a slave. Dinah imagines her as a wild, carefree
					woman. Werenro says little to the family but beckons Dinah to sit
					by her and smiles when she sees that Dinah enjoys her song. Dinah
					makes a connection with Werenro through her song, empathizing with
					the messenger’s loneliness at being far away from home. She also
					begins to feel a stirring within her to see more of the world herself,
					to see the things that Werenro has seen. Her connection to Werenro
					is rekindled later in the novel when they meet again. 

