With more comments on the infinite complexity of historical
					processes, the narrator tells us that Kutuzov warily reports a victory
					at Borodino but then decides to retreat beyond Moscow with his depleted
					army. Listening wearily to his disagreeing advisors, and despite
					the commander Bennigsen’s firm refusal to abandon the Russian capital,
					Kutuzov realizes that Moscow must be left for the French. Privately,
					Kutuzov tries to understand how he ever allowed Napoleon to reach
					Moscow. Despite official orders not to flee, Muscovites leave the
					city, refusing to submit to French occupation.

Meanwhile, Helene has become romantically attached to
					a foreign prince and an old Russian grandee. She converts to Catholicism in
					the hopes of persuading the Pope to annul her marriage to Pierre, making
					a sizeable donation to the church at the same time. After some wavering,
					Helene settles on remarriage to the Russian grandee. She seeks divorce
					from Pierre even though the Rostovs’ friend Marya Dmitrievna publicly
					calls her a whore.

After Borodino, Pierre is dazed and distressed, traveling
					on the road to Mozhaysk, where he intends to take refuge. Sleeping
					in the courtyard of an inn, he dreams of his Masonic benefactor
					and of other acquaintances. He awakens to news that Mozhaysk is
					being abandoned to the French, and that Andrew and Anatole Kuragin are
					dead. Arriving in Moscow, Pierre is summoned by Count Rostopchin,
					the local commander in chief. Another official tells Pierre of a
					case involving a forged Napoleonic proclamation, and also conveys
					rumors about Helene’s plans to travel to Europe. Count Rostopchin
					warns Pierre to break off contact with the Masons. Informed that
					Helene has converted to Catholicism to attain a divorce, and reflecting
					sadly on Andrew’s death, Pierre suddenly abandons the twelve people
					waiting to conduct business with him. He flees into the city of
					Moscow without telling anyone where he is going.

When Petya joins the hussars, Countess Rostova is distressed that
					both her sons may be killed at any moment. Meanwhile, the Rostov
					family inefficiently prepares to flee Moscow, despite contradictory
					official rumors that no one will be allowed to leave. The countess
					is pleased at Nicholas’s news of a romantic interest in the wealthy
					Princess Mary. Even Sonya admits this development is a good prospect,
					and she appeases her grief by directing the evacuation of the Rostov
					household. Natasha and Petya, home on leave, are in high spirits,
					awaiting the extraordinary events to come.

The Rostov household is in disorder as the evacuation
					from Moscow grows imminent. Natasha, too distracted to help pack
					the family’s belongings, invites wounded soldiers stationed outside
					to stay in the Rostov home. Petya learns that there will be a battle
					the next day. The countess is terrified, but Petya is excited. Natasha
					takes control of the packing, and the household prepares to leave
					the following day. Andrew shows up wounded and dying, and is given
					refuge in the Rostov home without the Rostovs’ knowledge.

Moscow is thrown into confusion, as commodities are pricier and
					serfs are running away. Just before departing, the old count generously
					offers to unload some of his carts and use them to convey wounded
					soldiers, despite his wife’s objections. Under Natasha’s influence,
					the count finally orders all the family’s possessions to be unloaded,
					and all the carts made available to the wounded. Sonya, told that
					Andrew is among the soldiers being conveyed, informs the countess,
					who worries about Natasha’s reaction and hides this development
					from her.

On the way out of the city, Natasha glimpses Pierre on
					the street. They talk, and Pierre says he is staying in Moscow.
					Natasha wishes to stay with him. Pierre, depressed with news of
					Helene’s intended remarriage, has been living in the house of his
					deceased Masonic advisor, Bazdeev. Pierre has been sorting through
					the books and papers Bazdeev left, and has disguised himself in
					peasant clothes and armed himself with a pistol for self-protection.

Napoleon, meanwhile, is in the Poklonny Hills near Moscow,
					filled with pride that the great city will soon be his and imagining
					the high level of civilization he will bring to Russia. He prepares
					to meet with the elders of the city, to appoint a governor, and
					to conduct other business. But Napoleon is startled and insulted
					by the news that the elders have left Moscow, and that the city
					is full only of drunken mobs, like a hive without its queen bee.
					Some of the Russian troops being convoyed out of Moscow are tempted
					to escape and loot the abandoned shops, and it is hard to maintain
					order among them. With the gentry and administrators gone, anarchy
					threatens the city, and murders proliferate.

Count Rostopchin, local commander of Moscow, is told to
					reinstate order. In order to promote public tranquility, however,
					he lies to the common folk, telling them Moscow is in no danger
					of French invasion. He also makes insufficient preparations for
					total evacuation of the city. Though out of touch with popular feeling,
					Rostopchin imagines himself as leader of the people of Moscow. When he
					is told to leave the city without any opportunity for heroism, his ego
					is wounded. He gives thoughtless orders to release prison inmates
					and patients from mental asylums out into the city.

Rostopchin prepares to leave Moscow, but he is delayed
					by the necessity of dealing with a political traitor named Vereshchagin—the
					man who earlier forged Napoleonic decrees and distributed them.
					Rostopchin publicly displays Vereshchagin and orders the crowd to
					punish him, which they do with cruelty. Inwardly, Rostopchin is
					sickened by the mob. Riding in his carriage on the way out of the
					city, he is approached by a lunatic who thinks himself to be Jesus
					Christ. Rostopchin again is inwardly appalled at the cruelty he has
					caused. Rostopchin meets Kutuzov, whom he gently blames for the
					chaos in Moscow. Kutuzov meaninglessly states that Moscow will not
					be abandoned without a battle, though that is exactly what is occurring.
					The French troops enter Moscow and delightedly enjoy its houses
					and food supplies, looting wherever they can. Careless soldiers
					contribute to igniting vast fires that consume much of the city.

Meanwhile, Pierre, still lodged in Bazdeev’s house, is
					obsessed by what he sees as mystical evidence that he is destined
					to be Napoleon’s vanquisher. Constantly drunk and nearly insane,
					he develops a fantastic plot to assassinate the French leader. When
					a French officer named Ramballe wanders into the house, Bazdeev’s
					madman brother fires upon him. Pierre forgets his disguise and rushes
					to the officer’s aid, asking him in French if he has been wounded.
					Ramballe calls Pierre his savior and invites him to dine. The patriotic
					Frenchman rhapsodizes about Paris and informs Pierre that Napoleon
					is to arrive the next day. He tells Pierre tales of love, and Pierre
					confesses his love for Natasha.

The Rostovs catch sight of Moscow in flames, which causes
					the countess and the servants to weep. Natasha, who has learned
					that Andrew is in their convoy, is agitated to think he is sleeping
					just across the courtyard. In the night, she sneaks into his room
					and greets him. For the first time, Andrew remembers his earlier
					battlefield revelation about true happiness. He imagines Natasha
					to be a hallucination at first, but then sees she is real. Natasha
					begs Andrew for forgiveness.

The half-crazed Pierre prepares his plans to assassinate
					Napoleon and goes out with a dagger under his cloak, walking in
					a dazed and distracted manner. As if waking up from a dream, he
					comes upon a burning house with a woman standing outside, weeping over
					a little girl left inside. Pierre circumvents the French guards, enters
					the house, and saves the girl. Once outside again, he is unable to
					find the girl’s family. Then, attempting to stop a Frenchman from bothering
					an Armenian girl, Pierre becomes angry, attracting the attention
					of the French authorities, who arrest him on suspicions of espionage.

The idea of renunciation, of surrendering the external
					valuables of one’s life, recurs frequently in these chapters as
					Tolstoy’s symbol of spiritual achievement. This renunciation is
					both private and public, both emotional and military. The citizens
					of Smolensk give up their city to the invading French, and Kutuzov
					follows suit by regretfully surrendering the city of Moscow. Such
					surrender astonishes Napoleon, who in his materialistic fashion
					cannot fathom that a country would prefer spiritual freedom to material
					loss of property. Indeed, we see that the Russian abandonment of
					Moscow is the real undoing of the French. The invaders loot Russian
					treasures, but they cannot conquer Russia. The French failure to
					conquer the Russian soul is mirrored on an individual level in Pierre,
					who, even when held captive, knows that the French cannot touch
					his “immortal soul.” We see another willing surrender of the physical
					world in the Rostovs’ abandonment of their possessions so that the
					wounded Russian soldiers may be evacuated from Moscow. To Tolstoy,
					giving up material possessions is not a loss, but rather a spiritual
					gain.

Tolstoy constantly emphasizes the absurdity of war in
					his portrayal of occupied Moscow through Pierre’s eyes. Pierre’s
					awareness of the stupidity of the war is heightened by the fact
					that, of the Russians, he is the one most symbolically associated
					with the French. Pierre is called by a French name throughout the
					novel (the narrator never calls him “Petr,” as the name “Peter”
					typically appears in Russian), speaks French beautifully, has lived
					in Paris, and gets along well with the French officer Ramballe.
					Through Pierre’s example, Tolstoy—himself one of the modern world’s
					great pacifists and an important influence on Gandhi’s doctrine
					of non-aggression—highlights the human instinct for solidarity and
					togetherness that opposes the contrary instinct for division and
					bloodshed.

