Matthew, one of Macheath’s cohorts, enters a stable in
					Soho. He searches the space with a revolver, and Macheath follows
					after him. Once Matthew has confirmed that the stable is empty,
					Polly enters, wearing a wedding dress. Polly is disappointed that
					they are going to celebrate their marriage in a stable and even
					more upset to learn they are going to start their new life together
					with a crime. She appears not to know Macheath very well. Macheath
					promises that the furnishings will arrive soon.

The other criminals, Jacob, Robert, Walter, and Ed, enter,
					delivering carpets, furniture, food, and table settings. They excitedly
					tell Macheath about all the people that were killed or injured in
					the acquisition of these goods. However, Macheath is disappointed
					and tells them that they will never be businessmen. Polly is distraught that
					people have been hurt just to provide for her wedding. Macheath
					becomes angry not at the fact that people have been hurt but that
					the stolen goods do not match. He assumes that is why Polly is upset
					too and assures her not to worry because the priest will be there
					soon.

The men set up the stable with their takings and reveal
					their incompetence in stealing furnishings. The furnishings consist
					of only two chairs, fourteen forks, two knives, and the legs of
					a harpsichord, which were sawn off to make a bench. Matthew offers
					his heartfelt congratulations to Macheath and then makes a crude
					joke to Polly, which causes Macheath to knock him to the ground. Macheath
					tells him to save his dirty talk for the whore Kitty. Matthew says
					he would never use filthy language with Kitty, and besides, he has
					heard about the kind of things that Macheath says to Lucy. This
					remark is the first reference to Macheath being involved with another
					woman. Macheath shoots a severe look at Matthew, and the other men
					separate the two from each other.

The thieves offer their presents to the couple. Macheath
					is disappointed with each gift, while Polly thinks they are nice.
					They all sit down to eat, but before they can dig in, Macheath asks
					his men to sing something “delightful.” Matthew almost chokes with
					laughter at Macheath’s attempt at high-class language. Then Ed lets
					another reference to Lucy slip, and this time Polly notices and
					asks Macheath who she is. Jacob tells Polly not to worry about Lucy,
					and Matthew gestures to Jacob to not say anything. Polly tries to
					get more information out of Jacob, but he denies her. Macheath ignores Polly’s
					questions.

Reverend Kimball arrives, and Macheath calls for a song
					again. Three of the thieves stand and sing about a couple that marries
					without really knowing each other at all. Macheath is disgusted
					and inappropriately calls the song “penurious.” Matthew laughs at
					this fancy language again, but Polly defuses the situation by offering
					to sing her own song. She sings “Pirate Jenny,” about a girl who
					works at a dive bar and is always being teased by the customers
					about “when her ship will come in.” In the song, the girl patiently
					does her work and smiles at her dreary circumstances, knowing that
					one day her pirate husband will pull into the harbor and kill anyone
					she points at before whisking her away.

The song gets a warm reception all around, but then the
					police arrive. The men are frightened, yet Macheath greets the sheriff, Tiger
					Brown, as an old friend. They sing “The Song of the Heavy Cannon”
					about their service in the army in India together. Then Macheath
					raves about how close he and Brown are. Macheath explains that every
					time Macheath steals something, he gives Brown a slice. Every time
					Brown makes a raid, he tips off Macheath in advance. As he speaks,
					Macheath notices Brown sadly staring at the carpet. Brown notices
					the rug is from the Oriental Carpet Company, and Macheath, like
					a savvy shopper, smoothes over the situation by acting like a frequent
					customer of the store. Brown mentions how concerned he is about
					the queen’s coronation. Macheath tells Brown that he is sure Peachum
					has it in for him and checks with Brown that his record at Scotland
					Yard is clean. Brown assures him that his record is clear and then
					exits. Macheath’s men reveal their special present, a big bed for
					the new couple. The men exit, leaving Macheath and Polly alone.
					They speak a short stretch of verse about how the circumstances
					of their love do not matter.

A few of the play’s conflicts begin to unfold in these
					scenes. Polly does not really know the man she is marrying. The
					man she fell in love was proper and well-off in society, implying
					his position in public by taking Polly and her mother to the Octopus
					Hotel and wearing white kid gloves. The fact that Polly is appalled
					by the crimes around her shows that Macheath has lied to her about
					his true character. Macheath’s dishonesty with Polly shows that
					he is as untrustworthy in matters of love as he is in matters of
					business. However, Polly’s willingness to accept his criminality
					because she loves him shows just how strongly she feels about him.
					Another conflict is Macheath’s knowledge that Peachum may be after
					him. He anticipates the consequences of marrying Polly because he
					thinks Peachum will not approve of her marriage to a criminal. Also,
					the friendship between Macheath and Brown implies a conflict, and
					a complicity, between the law and crime.

This scene presents Macheath as a full-fledged character. Macheath
					has only been portrayed through song and through the Peachums’ terror
					at his name. Here in the stable, he embodies a lower-class crook
					with upwardly mobile aspirations. When his thieves bring him wedding
					presents to furnish the stable, Macheath’s anger is directed at
					the lack of style the men have shown in choosing the goods. Because
					Macheath often portrays himself as an upper-class citizen, he desires
					a classy wedding, just like the kind he imagines the upper classes
					have. In ranting at his men, though, Macheath also demonstrates
					that he does not actually know anything about being upper class.
					When he asks them to sing a “delightful” song, the chuckle from
					Matthew indicates that he and other thieves are not used to Macheath
					using such fancy words. Later, Macheath’s incorrect usage of the
					word penurious shows how hard he is trying to be
					a classier guy. Likewise, Macheath demands better table manners
					from the thieves he employs. Macheath’s appreciation of furniture
					and rugs purposefully mimics the way that consumer classes talk
					about objects. He also only “shops” at the finest carpet stores,
					and he appreciates, or tries to appreciate, the differences between
					certain types of furniture. Like most consumers, he does not care
					where his goods come from; he only cares about the quality. Macheath’s
					concern for better table manners and fine things demonstrates that
					crooks and those who do not commit crime are not always so different
					from one another.

Polly’s interaction with Macheath’s criminals ultimately
					displays the criminals as the good guys in The Threepenny
						Opera. At first Polly is shocked and upset by the stealing
					and murders that the crooks committed in order to celebrate her
					wedding. She represents a poor girl who does not realize what she
					has gotten herself into. However, a bond of sympathy is created
					between Polly and the criminals when she sees what they went through
					to make sure she had a nice wedding breakfast. She continues to
					warm up to them when they give her wedding gifts. As she becomes
					accustomed to the situation and as the humor mounts, she sees that
					the thieves are decent people after all. She eventually even takes
					responsibility for the party being a success by singing the boisterous
					and funny “Pirate Jenny.” The song, with its tale of vengeance at
					the hands of a sweetly demure girl, shows that Polly has a tougher
					side as well, which will emerge more fully as the play progresses.
					In this scene, Polly’s function is to be complicit in enjoying a
					life of crime.

The ending of the scene is an important example of the
					alienation effect. Here, the expectation is that Macheath and Polly
					will have a tender moment alone together. The first part of the
					verse they sing is a sweet description of their inability to ignore
					the circumstances of their love. But the last two lines state that
					the consequences of their love do not matter, a sentiment that pulls
					them out of their situation and calls into question whether their
					love is real. These are not lines that the characters would logically
					speak at that moment because they contradict the vows of love that
					they have sworn to each other. These lines instead function as a
					commentary on the action. As such, the verses of the song force
					the question of whether the love between Macheath and Polly is real.
					This question of the mutual love between Macheath and Polly creates
					alienation in the audience. The actual lines of the song challenge
					the audience’s expectation of how Macheath and Polly feel toward
					each other.

