The Book of Exodus begins more than four hundred years
					after Joseph, his brothers, and the Pharaoh he once served have
					all died. The new leadership in Egypt—feeling threatened by Jacob’s
					descendants, who have increased greatly in size—embarks on a campaign to
					subdue the Israelites, forcing them into slavery and eventually decreeing
					that all Hebrew boys must be killed at birth in the Nile River.
					The Hebrew women resist the decree, and one woman opts to save her
					newborn son by setting him afloat on the river in a papyrus basket.
					Fortunately, Pharaoh’s daughter discovers the abandoned child and
					raises him after he has been nursed, naming him Moses.

Moses is aware of his Hebrew roots, and, one day, he
					kills an Egyptian who is beating an Israelite worker. Moses flees
					in fear to Midian, a town near Sinai, where he meets a priest named
					Jethro and marries the man’s daughter, beginning a new life as a
					shepherd. God, however, is concerned for the suffering of the Israelites,
					and he appears to Moses in the form of a burning bush. God speaks
					to Moses, informing him of his plan to return the Israelites to Canaan—to
					“a land flowing with milk and honey” (3:8)—and
					to send Moses back to Egypt to accomplish this task. Moses is timid and
					resists, citing his lack of eloquence and abilities, and refuses
					to go. God is angered but encourages Moses, presenting him with
					a staff for performing miracles and instructing Moses to take his brother,
					Aaron, with him as an aid. When Moses asks God what his name is,
					God replies, “I AM WHO I AM” (3:14).

Moses and Aaron return to Egypt, where Moses
					organizes the Israelites and confronts the Pharaoh, demanding the
					release of the Hebrew people. Moses performs a miracle, turning
					his staff into a snake, but Pharaoh is unimpressed and only increases
					the workload for the Israelites. God responds by inflicting a series
					of ten plagues on Egypt. God turns the Nile River into blood, causes
					frogs to cover Egypt, turns all of the dust in Egypt to gnats, and
					causes swarms of flies to come into the houses of Pharaoh and his
					officials. God then strikes Egypt’s livestock with a disease, creates
					festering boils on humans and animals, and sends thunder, hail,
					and fire that destroy crops, livestock, and people. God sends swarms
					of locusts, and covers Egypt with “a darkness that can be felt”
					(10:21). Before each
					plague, Moses demands the Israelites’ release, and after each plague,
					God purposefully “hardens” Pharaoh so that he refuses the request
					(4:21, 7:22).
					The tenth and final plague kills all the firstborn males in Egypt.
					Before the plague, Moses instructs the Hebrew people to cover their
					door posts in the blood of a sacrificed lamb as a sign for God to
					protect their homes from his killings. Pharaoh relents and releases
					the more than 600,000 Israelites
					who, in turn, plunder the Egyptians’ wealth. Upon leaving, Moses
					enjoins the Israelites to commemorate this day forever by dedicating
					their firstborn children to God and by celebrating the festival
					of Passover, named for God’s protection from the final plague (12:14–43).

Guided by a pillar of cloud during the day and
					by fire during the night, Moses and the Israelites head west toward
					the sea. Pharaoh chases them. The Israelites complain that Moses
					has taken them to die in the wilderness, and Moses, at God’s bidding,
					parts the sea for the people to cross. Pharaoh follows and Moses
					closes the waters back again, drowning the Egyptian army. Witnessing
					the miracle, the people decide to trust Moses, and they sing a song
					extolling God as a great but loving warrior. Their optimism is brief,
					and the people soon begin to worry about the shortage of food and
					water. God responds by sending the people food from heaven, providing
					a daily supply of quail and a sweet bread-like substance called
					manna. The people are required only to obey God’s commandments to
					enjoy this food. Soon thereafter, the Israelites confront the warring
					Amalekite people, and God gives the Israelites the power to defeat
					them. During battle, whenever Moses raises his arms, the Israelites
					are able to rout their opponents.

Three months after the flight from Egypt, Moses
					and the Israelites arrive at Mount Sinai, where God appears before
					them, descending on the mountain in a cloud of thunder and lightning.
					Moses climbs the mountain, and God gives Moses two stone tablets
					with ten commandments inscribed on them regarding general, ethical
					behavior as well as an extended series of laws regarding worship,
					sacrifices, social justice, and personal property. God explains
					to Moses that if the people will obey these regulations, he will
					keep his covenant with Israel and will go with them to retrieve
					from the Canaanites the land promised to Abraham. Moses descends
					from the mountain and relates God’s commandments to the people.
					The people agree to obey, and Moses sprinkles the people with blood
					as a sign of the covenant. Moses ascends to the mountain again where
					God gives him more instructions, this time specifying in great detail
					how to build a portable temple called an ark in which God’s presence
					will dwell among the Israelites. God also emphasizes the importance
					of observing the Sabbath day of holy rest.

Moses comes down from the mountain after forty days,
					only to find that Aaron and the Israelites have now erected an idol—a golden
					calf that they are worshipping in revelry, in direct defiance of the
					ten commandments. Moses breaks the stone tablets on which God has
					inscribed the new laws, and God plans to destroy the people. Moses
					intercedes on the Israelites’ behalf, begging God to relent and
					to remember his covenant. Pleased with Moses, God is appeased and
					continues to meet with Moses face to face, “as one speaks to a friend,”
					in a special tent set aside for worship (33:11). God
					reaffirms his covenant with Moses, and, fashioning new stone tablets
					to record his decrees, God declares himself to be a compassionate,
					loving, and patient God. At Moses’s direction, the Israelites renew
					their commitment to the covenant by erecting a tabernacle to God
					according to the exact specifications God has outlined.

While Genesis explains the origins of the world and of
					humanity, Exodus is the theological foundation of the Bible. Exodus
					explains the origins of Torah—the law of the Jewish people and the
					tradition surrounding that law. Torah is not merely a list of laws,
					but, rather, the notion of law as a way of life. Indeed, the law exists
					as a way of life for Moses and his people. Although portions of
					Exodus are devoted to legal matters, the declaration of law in Exodus
					always comes in the form of a story, relayed by discussions between
					God and Moses, and between Moses and the people.

These laws and tradition are filled with symbols of God’s
					promise to the Israelites. In Genesis, God uses symbols such as
					the rainbow and gives people new names, like Abraham, as signs of
					his covenant. Such personalized signs are useful when communicating
					a promise to a single person or family. In Exodus, however, God attempts
					to communicate his promise to an entire nation of people. Social
					laws about how the Israelites should treat their slaves and annual
					festivals such as Passover are signs that a community of people
					can easily recognize and share. In this sense, obedience to God’s laws
					is less a means of achieving a level of goodness than it is a way for
					the people to denote their commitment to God’s covenant.

The Hebrew word for “Exodus” originally means
					“names,” and Exodus is often called the Book of Names. The book
					discusses the different names God takes and the various ways God
					manifests himself to the Israelites. When God tells Moses that his
					name is “I AM” (3:14), God
					defines himself as a verb (in Hebrew, ahyh) rather
					than a noun. This cryptic statement suggests that God is a being
					who is not subject to the limits of people’s expectations or definitions.
					Most often, however, God reveals himself to the people through theophany:
					extraordinary natural phenomena that signal God’s arrival or presence.
					Theophanic events in Exodus include the pillars of cloud and fire,
					the thunder at Mount Sinai, and the miraculous daily supply of manna.
					Such spectacles demonstrate God’s attempts to prove his existence
					to a nation of doubting people from whom he has been decidedly absent
					for more than four hundred years. The unwillingness of the people
					to accept God’s existence is never more apparent than when the Israelites
					worship a golden calf in the shadow of the thunderous Mount Sinai.
					As a result, God’s final manifestation of himself is the tabernacle—specifically,
					the Ark of the Covenant, a golden vessel in which God’s presence, or
					spirit, will reside. Like the law, the Ark is an effective symbol
					of God, for it is an object that the people not only build as a
					community according to God’s specifications but also as a religious vessel
					that can be picked up and carried wherever Israel goes.

Moses is the first true hero we encounter in the Hebrew
					Bible. He manifests all the traits of a traditional hero. He overcomes
					timidity and inner strife. He challenges Pharaoh, leading Israel
					to great feats. And he wields his own weapon, the miraculous staff.
					These elements give Moses traditional heroic status, but Moses also
					presents us with a new type of hero—the religious priest. All of
					Moses’s political and military dealings serve the one end of delivering
					the Israelites to God, physically moving them from Egypt to Mount
					Sinai and interceding to God for them when they disobey. As God
					declares early on, Moses is God’s representative to the people,
					and Moses makes God’s relationship with Israel a personal one. Instead
					of a series of incendiary explosions, Moses presents God’s instructions to
					the people through conversation and conveys God’s desire to destroy
					the Israelites by breaking the stone tablets in front of them. Most
					importantly, Moses’s dialogue with God enables the author to portray
					God in softer, human terms—as someone who listens, grieves, and
					is actually capable of changing his mind.

