As the grand jury convenes, Byron joins the gathering
					crowd downtown, self-conscious about his new role as the champion
					and savior of another man’s woman. He returns to the boardinghouse
					where Mrs. Beard has packed and stored his remaining items. He is
					finally able to meet with the sheriff and arrange to have Joe Brown
					taken out to the Burden farm later that day. Hidden in a clump of
					bushes, Byron watches the deputy push Brown into the cabin and close
					the door. Byron gets on his mule, loaded with his belongings, and
					rides off in an attempt to start a new life elsewhere. On the crest
					of a hill, he turns to see the Burden property below and notices
					Brown run out of the back of the cabin and make a mad dash for the
					woods. Turning the mule around, Byron gallops off in pursuit.

The narrative then shifts to Brown’s perspective as he
					is escorted from the jail and taken to the cabin. Once inside, shock,
					rage, and fear descend on him when he sees Lena and his newborn
					son. Brown lies, saying that he sent Lena money to come meet him
					but that he did so through an unreliable source. Realizing that
					he is trapped, he opens the cabin’s rear window and escapes. Reaching
					a shack, Brown pays a young man to bring a hastily scrawled message
					to the sheriff requesting that the courier return with the entirety
					of the reward money.

Brown is seated and waiting when Byron comes upon him.
					Byron gives Brown the chance to rise to his feet, and the men fight,
					Brown eventually getting the better of his smaller opponent. When
					Byron finally rises, bloody, from the grass, he walks to a railroad
					junction where he sees Brown jumping on a passing train. Headed
					back to town, a man in a wagon stops beside Byron to tell him that
					Christmas has been killed in town within the past hour.

The district attorney, Gavin Stevens, places the Hineses
					on the train for their return journey home and assures the elderly
					couple that their grandson’s body will be sent along the next day.
					It emerges that Joe Christmas was found hiding in Reverend Hightower’s
					house when he was recaptured and killed. A former schoolmate, coming
					to Jefferson to visit Stevens, steps off the train as the Hineses
					are boarding.

The account of Christmas’s escape and death is then told
					through the eyes of Percy Grimm, a young white supremacist with
					a zeal for the U.S. military. With a ragtag guard of American Legion
					members, he commands his men to patrol the town square and surrounding area.
					When Christmas escapes, Grimm commandeers a messenger’s bicycle
					and takes off in pursuit. Chasing Christmas to Reverend Hightower’s
					house, Grimm and three armed men burst in on the minister, who,
					taken by surprise, claims that Christmas was there with him on the
					night of the murder. Ignoring the preacher’s somewhat incoherent
					words, Grimm finds Christmas in the kitchen, where he shoots him
					five times and then, with a butcher knife, castrates him.

The recounting of Joe Brown’s trip to see Lena and his
					newborn son in the cabin epitomizes Light in August’s
					fluid sense of time and exploration of multiple perspectives. First,
					Faulkner offers Byron’s version of the proceedings, examining his
					murky motivations in wanting to reunite the child’s biological parents.
					Later, Faulkner retells the same event from Joe Brown’s point of
					view. The two separate accounts are then fused into a new and resulting
					action, when Byron witnesses Brown escaping via the cabin’s back
					window. Byron gives chase, and their showdown ensues. Though beaten, Byron
					emerges from the fight infused with a new purpose and willingness
					to assume personal risks he would never before have dreamed of.

While Joe Christmas seeks the essential knowledge of who
					he is and where he belongs in the world, Byron’s struggle centers
					on the perceived deficiencies of his existing identity. He deems
					the life he had known before meeting Lena an insufficient or outdated
					form. Implicit in his fantasy of flight is a notion of reinvention,
					the assumption of a new life and a new identity. “And Byron Bunch,”
					he reminds himself, “he wouldn’t even have to be or not be Byron Bunch.”
					Lying in the undergrowth near the railroad tracks, he perceives
					his old life slipping away. The people who had made up his existence,
					even he himself, are likened to “discarded and fragmentary toys
					. . . small objects which had never been alive, which he had played
					with in childhood and then broken and forgot.” Symbolically, Byron’s
					old sense of self has been replaced with a new order, a delayed
					but nonetheless welcome adulthood.

In Chapter 19, as Percy Grimm chases
					the desperately fleeing Joe Christmas, Faulkner introduces the lingo
					of chess: Grimm’s body moves instinctively in pursuit of Christmas,
					as if drawn by a more powerful agent, in “blind obedience to whatever
					Player moved him on the Board.” It is an ironic turn, as Faulkner’s
					characters, tormented over the course of the novel by their incomplete
					and imprisoning subjectivities, ultimately are rendered powerless
					objects, their will and sense of self-determination merely an illusion.
					The characters’ struggles—to resist suffering, to achieve a whole
					and grounded sense of self—turn out to be all for naught, as if
					they are merely acting out the final scenes of a scripted drama,
					going through the motions only to arrive at a predetermined fate.
					Faulkner equates life with a game of chess, with its various strategies
					and attacks and missteps, all obscuring the fact that these individuals
					are ultimately moving toward a predetermined and inalterable conclusion.
					In the interim, the characters maintain the sustaining illusion
					that they are the masters of their own fate, when in fact they are
					actually pawns being manipulated by forces larger than themselves
					and beyond their control.

