At school, Frank is now in the fourth form, which is taught
					by Mr. O’Neill, a tiny man with a passion for geometry. Mr O’Dea,
					the fifth-form master, is infuriated when he finds from Paddy Clohessy that
					Mr. O’Neill is teaching the boys about Euclid and geometry, because
					geometry is not supposed to be taught until the fifth form. The
					headmaster orders Mr. O’Neill to stop teaching it.

	Every day, Mr. O’Neill gives his apple peel, a great
					delicacy, to the boy who correctly answers a difficult question.
					One day, this honor falls to Fintan Slattery, whom Frank describes
					as a dandified do-gooder. Fintan goes to church every day with his
					mother; he curls his blond hair and answers taunts with a saintly
					smile. Fintan shares the peel with Frank, Quigley, and Paddy Clohessy.
					This humiliates the boys, who do not want to be associated with
					the feminine Fintan. Fintan invites Paddy and Frank to his house
					after school, luring them with promises of food. Fintan’s mother
					serves milk and sandwiches with mustard, luxurious treats for the
					boys. Paddy and Frank are worried, however, by the fact that Fintan
					goes with them to the bathroom and says he enjoys looking at them.

	A few days later, Fintan invites the boys home with him
					for lunch, but instead of feeding them, he eats his sandwich by
					himself. Angry and hungry, Paddy and Frank don’t return to school
					after lunch, but cut class to steal apples and milk from a nearby
					farm. Quigley sees Frank and tells him his parents are looking for
					him and are going to kill him. Scared, Frank goes home with Paddy,
					who lives in unbearable squalor. Paddy’s father is consumptive and
					lies in bed coughing up green fluid into a bucket. The next morning,
					Angela appears with the school guard and tells Frank how worried
					she has been about him. Mr. Clohessy reminisces with Angela, remembering
					how they used to dance together. Angela sings for the dying man
					and cries as she leaves his home, sorry for Mr. Clohessy’s sickness
					and sad to remember the carefree times they had when they were young.
					Frank is sorry for Mr. Clohessy, but he is mostly relieved not to
					be in trouble.

Malachy continues to drink away his dole money. The brothers, even
					three-year-old Michael, take their cue from Angela and refuse to
					talk to Malachy during the weekend after he drinks the dole.

	Frank has a friend named Mickey Spellacy whose siblings
					are dying of consumption one by one. Everyone envies Mickey because he
					gets a week off from school for every sibling that dies, and money and
					sympathy from grown-ups who feel sorry for him. Mickey asks Frank
					and Billy Campbell to pray that Mickey’s sick sister will not die
					until September, so that Mickey can get a week off from school. In
					return, Mickey promises Frank and Billy that they will be invited to
					his sister’s wake, where there will be food and singing and stories. Although
					Mickey gets his wish, and his sister dies during the school term,
					the boys are not invited to the wake. Frank is satisfied when Mickey
					himself dies of consumption the following year and doesn’t get any
					time off from school.

	Grandma decides Frank should help Uncle Pat deliver newspapers.
					Uncle Pat mistreats Frank, making him run about in the rain, and
					paying him poorly. Frank delivers the paper to an old man named
					Mr. Timoney, and agrees to read to him for money. Mr. Timoney is
					a smart, well-traveled, crotchety old man, and he takes to Frank.
					At Timoney’s request, Frank reads John Swift’s satirical essay “A
					Modest Proposal.” Angela tells Frank that Mr. Timoney served in
					the English army in India and married an Indian woman who was accidentally
					killed by a soldier. Angela is thrilled that her son now has two
					jobs, but Frank gets in trouble with Declan Collopy for missing
					the Confraternity’s Friday night meetings. Declan insults Uncle
					Pat, and Frank fights Declan. Mr. Timoney vows to talk to Pa Keating
					about Declan’s bullying. It is a relief to Frank to have the companionship
					of Mr. Timoney, who talks to him like a friend would. A little later,
					however, Mr. Timoney is pronounced demented and taken away to the
					City Home because he laughed when his dog bit three people and when
					a priest pronounced his Buddhism a danger to Catholics.

	In the summer, Angela gives birth to a boy. Bridey Hannon’s mother
					saves the child from choking to death on a ball of dried milk. Angela
					decides to name the baby Alphonsus, a name Frank dislikes. Grandpa
					sends his new grandson a money order for five pounds. Angela sends
					Malachy to get the money order cashed, and she sends Frank and Malachy
					Jr. with their father to watch him. After Malachy gets the cash,
					he orders the boys home. They protest, but he walks away from them
					and into the pub. Angela, incensed, sends them back out to find
					him. While searching the Limerick pubs, Frank steals a drunken man’s
					fish and chips. Feeling guilty for the theft, he goes to Confession
					right away. The priest asks him why he stole, and when it comes
					out that Frank was hungry because his father is out drinking up
					all the money for food, the priest says he (the priest) should be
					washing the feet of those he hears confess, not doling out penances.

	Frank goes back out into the night and eventually hears
					his father singing in a pub. Frank is “raging inside,” but he thinks
					of mornings by the fire with his father and of the look in his father’s
					eyes when he drinks: “he has that look in his eyes Eugene had when
					he searched for Oliver.” Frank goes home with Malachy, thinking
					that everything will change now, because it is one thing to drink
					your wages and the dole money, but drinking money meant for a baby
					is “beyond the beyonds.”

In Chapter VI, we see how children soak up the political
					views and opinions of their parents, and take them for their own.
					When Paddy Clohessy scoffs, “The English quality wouldn’t give you
					the steam of their piss,” and Frank is impressed by his cleverness,
					Paddy admits that the saying comes directly from his father, who
					complains about the English as he lies dying in his bed. Hatred
					of the English, among other things, is taught to these children
					every day.

	When Frank goes to Paddy’s house, we feel, along with
					Frank, relief that the McCourts live in relative comfort. As Frank
					says to himself, “It’s bad when our kitchen is a lake and we have
					to go up to Italy but it’s worse in the Clohessys’ when you have
					to go down four flights to the lavatory and slip on shit all the
					way down.”

	As usual, death hovers over daily life. It is such an
					omnipresent part of Frank’s existence that he feels little more
					than grim satisfaction when the annoying Mickey Spellacy dies of
					consumption.

	In Chapter VII, McCourt draws a contrast between the
					masters’ narrow-minded teaching (their squabbling over who owns
					Euclid and geometry) and Mr. Timoney’s freethinking curiosity. Mr. Timoney,
					an anti-establishment figure, is instantly appealing and lovable.
					He is full of life, yelling at his dog and calling her an “old hoor,”
					touting the virtues of Buddhism, and recognizing Frank’s intelligence
					and treating him like a peer. Because Timoney exists at the edges
					of normal society, however, people look on him with suspicion and
					distrust. McCourt suggests that Mr. Timoney is taken to the Home
					because of his eccentricity, wisdom, and religious difference, rather
					than for any real mental illness.

	Mr. Timoney introduces Frank to Jonathan Swift’s work
					“A Modest Proposal,” in which Swift uses satire to highlight the
					plight of the Irish poor. Although Frank does not understand what
					he is reading, the allusion to this text reminds readers that Swift
					was satirizing hunger such as that from which Frank suffers.

	In past chapters, Frank has noted what the reader recognizes
					as the foibles of the Catholic church, citing its condemnatory policies, even
					though he takes them for universal truth and does not question them.
					In this chapter, though, Frank experiences the love and charity
					of Catholicism when he visits a priest and confesses to stealing food.
					The priest says, “My child, I sit here. I hear the sins of the poor. I
					assign the penance. I bestow absolution. I should be on my knees washing
					their feet.” The priest is kind, wise, and truly compassionate,
					and his words reference the actions of Jesus, who knelt to wash the
					feet of his apostles.

	A turning point comes when Malachy drinks away the baby’s money.
					This marks the first time Frank expresses real anger about his father’s
					staggering irresponsibility. Although he thinks of sitting by his
					father before the fire and hearing stories, and although he realizes
					that when Malachy drinks he is somehow looking for his dead children,
					Frank also “rages inside,” and he wants to run into the bar and
					kick his father. Frank himself recognizes this anger as a turning
					point, saying, “[I]t will be different now.”

