Eighteen-year-old survivor of the Hunger Games and Quarter Quell from District 12. Katniss is the protagonist of the story and the primary caretaker of her mother and sister. She is skilled with a bow, stubborn, and fiercely independent. She becomes the Mockingjay, the symbol of the rebellion.

Read an in-depth analysis of Katniss Everdeen.

Katniss’s best friend and hunting partner, also from District 12. He has been in love with Katniss for several years and is loyal to her. He grows increasingly ruthless in his tactics against the Capitol.

Read an in-depth analysis of Gale Hawthorne.

Survivor of the Hunger Games and Quarter Quell. He is in love with Katniss and saved her family from starvation when they were young. He is normally sweet and patient until he is brainwashed by the Capitol and forced to turn against Katniss. Katniss and friends ultimately help him relearn what is real and not real.

Read an in-depth analysis of Peeta Mellark.

President of District 13 and leader of the rebellion against the Capitol. She is the cold and insensitive foil to Katniss. She does not like Katniss, but needs her as the Mockingjay. After overthrowing the Capitol, she reveals her inherent vindictiveness by trying to establish a new series of Hunger Games using Capitol children.

Read an in-depth analysis of Alma Coin.

Katniss’s younger sister. She works as a medic and is being trained as a doctor. She matures significantly during the novel, and is calm and intelligent.

Conniving and manipulative President of Panem and antagonist of the story. He and Katniss make a promise never to lie to each other. He achieved power by poisoning anyone standing in his way, and drank poison himself to cover suspicion. This has resulted in bleeding sores in his mouth, and he wears a rose in his lapel to cover the smell of the blood.

Read an in-depth analysis of President Snow.

Katniss and Peeta’s mentor during the 74th Hunger Games. As a victor himself, he is plagued by depression and alcoholism. He is clever, though often pessimistic. He understands Katniss and helps her fulfill her role as the Mockingjay.

A quiet, skilled healer who never recovered after her husband was killed in a mining accident in District 12. She works as a nurse in District 13 after the firebombing of District 12. She loves her daughters but has no way to protect them.

A skilled documentary filmmaker from the Capitol who supports the rebellion. She is brought to District 13 to make propos of Katniss as the Mockingjay, and her work accelerates the rebellion.

Former Head Gamemaker for the Hunger Games. He joins the rebellion and is useful for his knowledge of the inner workings of the Capitol. His loyalty is questionable at times.

Katniss’s former prep team from the Capitol. Octavia, Venia, and Flavius are brought to District 13 to help style Katniss as the Mockingjay. They are loyal to Katniss and do not understand the sparse living conditions in the district.

Cunning assistant to Plutarch Heavensbee. She tries to turn Katniss into someone she is not with heavy make-up and styling and is disappointed when Haymitch points out Katniss works best when she is herself.

Winner of the Hunger Games at age 14 from District 4. He is skilled with a trident. He loves Annie Cresta and marries her after she is rescued from the Capitol. He fights with the “star squad” in the Capitol.

Television host of the Hunger Games and well-known throughout Panem. He has a reputation for making any horrible situation look rosy.

Coin’s number two in command of the rebellion. He gives Katniss insight into Coin. He believes Katniss has earned the right to a long life and promises to protect her.

Bristly winner of the 71st Hunger Games for District 7. She is captured and tortured by the Capitol. After she is rescued, she becomes addicted to morphling. She trains with Katniss and supports her when she feels she cannot go on.

Prim’s cat, loyal only to Prim. He is ugly and dislikes Katniss.

Former Hunger Games winner who now lives in District 13. He is extremely skilled in designing weapons, including weapons Katniss views as cruel.

Tough young commander in charge of the rebels in District 8. Later, she becomes the fair, upright President of Panem.

A sweet girl from District 12 who grew up with Peeta and Katniss. She is selected as a neutral person with whom Peeta can converse after his hijacking because she won’t raise bad memories.

A Capitol woman who works as part of the rebel underground. She has had her face surgically altered to look like a striped cat. She was a Hunger Games stylist and is now fearless and helpful.

Bought and sold items on the black market in District 12 where she was a cook. She works as a cook in District 13 after the firebombing of District 12.

Girlfriend and later, wife, of Finnick Odair. She won the 70th Hunger Games for District 4. Her mental stability is fragile after she is tortured by the Capitol, and she often has episodes where she acts strangely.

Brothers who are skilled, brave cameramen for Cressida’s film crew. Pollux is an Avox who worked in the tunnels of the Capitol for five years.

Former Hunger Games winner. He becomes the commander of District 2 for the rebellion.

Cressida’s assistant. He is from the Capitol and proves useful when the star squad is navigating the Capitol.

Katniss’s doctor in District 13. He is patient and kind, taking care of emotionally damaged patients.

