Esperanza Ortega’s first appearances in the novel earn her the title of “princess,” which she kindly receives. She is presented as a proud girl of almost thirteen years old when the main story begins. She is aware of her standing as a wealthy, cherished only child whose life could hardly be more secure and comfortable, surrounded by strong, loving female role models and protected by kindly male figures. Esperanza dreams of parties, pretty clothes, and becoming an admired woman like her mother. Still, she is not entirely shallow, and absorbs Abuelita’s advice along with some of her talent for storytelling and crocheting, foreshadowing how Esperanza will later need and use all these skills.

After her father’s death, and throughout the course of her unexpected and unwilling immigrant experience in California, Esperanza is forced to evolve and mature. Her fears, confusion, and anger as she experiences loss, grief, humiliation, and uncertainty are presented honestly in conversations with other characters and vignettes. Esperanza is clearly and understandably anguished by the hardships of her new life, and she knows she is neither a “princess” turned pauper nor “Cinderella,” as the migrant field worker, Marta, unkindly describes her.

Esperanza faces several setbacks that force her to adapt before she truly accepts the ways in which her life has changed. However, once Esperanza begins to gain confidence, her courage and hard-working determination shine through. Her strength is displayed as her mother’s health deteriorates and she is forced to confront and navigate the uncomfortable social and economic disparities among even the already marginalized groups of workers. Esperanza has compassion for both Isabel, her young friend, and even Marta, her antagonist. When Esperanza experiences a possible betrayal near the end of the story, her growth is shown as her anger passes quickly and not into resignation and sadness.

Esperanza’s story is an honest portrait of a young girl growing to understand herself and where she belongs, the latter of which is first and foremost among her family of strong women. By the novel’s end, Esperanza is able to hear her own heart beating along with that of the land and is strong enough to work to make her newfound dreams come true.

