As Simon explains his and Daphne’s plans to feign a courtship, Anthony protests, saying they are both insane. But when Daphne points out that she has already had six suitors since Simon acted interested in her at the ball, Anthony is forced to admit that she may have a point. Anthony still objects to their deception, but he understands that the plan could be beneficial to Daphne and Simon, so he agrees to not interfere. However, Anthony sets two conditions: no one else can ever know about their faux courtship, and Simon and Daphne must never be alone together. Anthony swears that if he sees Simon act inappropriately toward Daphne, he will kill him. That night, Simon joins the Bridgerton family for dinner. Simon feels comfortable around the rowdy Bridgertons and agrees to join them on a day trip to the Royal Observatory in Greenwich.

On a yacht to the Royal Observatory, Daphne apologizes to Simon, believing that he must have felt strong-armed by Lady Bridgerton into joining her family. Simon tells her that her apology is unnecessary, as he is genuinely enjoying himself. Simon and Daphne notice Anthony glowering at them, and despite knowing that it is a dangerous idea, Simon wishes he could kiss Daphne. The group disembarks at the Royal Observatory, and Simon takes note of how capable Daphne is at handling her younger sisters and her younger brother Gregory.

After lunch, Simon plays with and teases Daphne’s younger siblings. When Daphne asks if he has much experience with children, Simon grows quiet and simply says no. Attempting to lighten the mood, Daphne says that she is sure he will make a good father one day, and Simon curtly reminds her that he doesn’t want to marry or have children. As the group start to re-board the yacht, Gregory slips on the dock and falls toward the water. Simon and Anthony both quickly rush to help Gregory, only to end up in the river themselves. Gregory is fine, but as Simon and Anthony emerge from the water, they argue about which one should have tried to help Gregory—making the trip home is very tense. That night, Daphne asks Anthony why Simon is so dead-set against marriage. Anthony replies he doesn’t know, but he knows that Simon is serious about his decision.

The Bridgertons are a shining example of the power of familial bonds. Though Anthony and Simon are best friends, Anthony’s concern for his sister’s well-being takes precedence over a long-time friendship, as indicated by Anthony’s anger at Simon when he believes the duke has a romantic interest in Daphne. Even after Anthony learns that the courtship is fake, his strict conditions that the sham remain a secret, that Daphne and Simon never spend any time alone, and that Simon never compromise Daphne’s honor on threat of physical violence, illustrate how seriously Anthony takes his role. As older brother and man of the house, it is his duty to protect his sister and the family reputation. Simon ponders how he and his friend have matured since their school days, emphasizing the importance of family when he compares his responsibilities as a duke to Anthony’s duties to his younger siblings. Simon’s enjoyment of the Bridgerton family dinner and the outing to the Royal Observatory, as well as his willingness to try to protect young Gregory, suggests he finds a certain comfort among the chaos of family gatherings. Though he didn’t have strong family bonds and says he will never have a family of his own, Simon finds himself at home among the Bridgertons. 

Other eligible young men previously tended to see Daphne as a friend because of her easygoing demeanor, but when they learn of Simon’s interest in her, they change their minds entirely; because someone of as a high a social rank as Simon sees potential in Daphne as a romantic partner, they now do too. On the surface, the ruse is working as planned. Beneath the surface, however, there are unintended consequences. On the family outing to the Royal Observatory, Daphne’s budding romantic feelings for Simon become apparent when she has strange thoughts of putting her arms around him. Similarly, Simon looks at Daphne, and her smile and natural beauty take his breath away, indicating that his feelings are also more than friendly. As Daphne questions Anthony about Simon’s avoidance of marriage, her own thoughts betray her interest as more than mere curiosity. Daphne’s focus on Anthony’s description of Simon as a good man and her silent disputes of his belief that Simon is not right for her show that her feelings of friendship are transforming into feelings of love, and that their fake courtship foreshadows a real one.

