Christian asks Hopeful if he knows of a fellow named Temporary, who
					was religious and who resolved to go on a pilgrimage as they are
					doing now. Hopeful knows of the man. Christian says that Temporary’s
					resolve only lasted a short time, until he met someone named Saveself
					and stopped talking to Christian. Temporary’s example leads Hopeful
					to ask that they discuss the causes of spiritual backsliding in
					general. Hopeful explains that fear, shame, and guilt are all causes
					for the devout to lose sight of their salvation. He lists some key
					symptoms of backsliders, including the abandonment of duties, association
					with loose people, and the shunning of Christian friends.

Christian and Hopeful are told they face more difficulties.
					Two of the three Shining Ones encourage them onward. One difficulty soon
					appears before them: a river flowing between them and the city gate.
					There is no bridge, so when they try to cross, Christian feels himself
					start to sink, despairing of reaching his goal. He tells Hopeful
					he fears he will never see the land of milk and honey. Hopeful urges
					him on, but Christian tells him to go on without him. Then Hopeful
					mentions Jesus Christ, who wishes Christian well. The vision of
					Christ gives Christian new hope, and they emerge from the river.

The Shining Ones lead them up to the gate of the City
					on a tall hill, where trumpeters greet them. Christian and Hopeful
					realize they have lost their mortal garments in the river. The Shining
					Ones beseech the king of the City to open the gate. The king announces that
					anyone who keeps God’s truth may enter and commands that the gate
					open for Christian and Hopeful. They enter and are clothed in garments
					of gold.

After watching Christian and Hopeful enter through the
					gate, the narrator wishes he were with them. Ignorance is shut out
					of the City because he is without a certificate of entry and is
					sent to hell. The narrator wakes up from his dream.

In the conclusion, the narrator says that he has told
					his dream and invites the reader to interpret it. Though he warns
					of the dangers of interpreting his dream wrongly, the narrator also
					cautions against playing around with the obvious surface content
					of the tale, being entertained by it rather than instructed. He
					says that, just as no one throws away an apple to save the core,
					so too must no one throw away the essence of his story to save its
					inessential parts.

Christian’s discussion of Temporary displays his spiritual
					confidence near the end of his journey. Like his earlier tale about
					Little-Faith, his story about Temporary demonstrates that Christian
					possesses the certitude necessary to analyze cases of pilgrims who
					fail. In earlier chapters, he was not sure enough of his own success
					to make such judgments. After all, Temporary’s story reveals the
					risk of Christian’s own position, since Temporary also felt saved
					until he failed to follow through on his spiritual achievement.
					Christian could backslide also, at least theoretically. Temporary’s
					fate could be his own. But he understands himself and his progress
					enough to trust that he will succeed where Temporary failed.

The scene of Christian’s near drowning emphasizes the
					importance of knowledge gained through travel. Throughout The
						Pilgrim’s Progress, Christian has encountered many difficulties, including
					falling into the Slough of Despond at the beginning of the journey.
					In the Slough, another pilgrim rescued Christian, but now Christian
					is forced to think of his own way out of the river. By learning
					from the mistakes of the pilgrims he’s met on the journey, Christian
					stays on the right path toward salvation. Christian’s strong faith
					and belief that the Celestial City exists pulls him out of the river.
					If Christian chose to accompany Ignorance on an easier path, he
					would have been cast out of the Celestial City. Earlier on his journey,
					Christian made the mistake of listening to Worldly Wiseman, but
					now he does not make the same error. Instead, Christian immediately
					recognizes Ignorance as a fool. The knowledge Christian gains on
					the journey aids him in his final task when crossing the river.


The Pilgrim’s Progress sometimes switches
					back and forth between novel and allegory. Strictly speaking, the
					despair that Christian feels in the river is a spiritual danger
					that he surpassed long ago. After all, he escaped the threat of
					Giant Despair and his Doubting Castle. According to the rules of
					allegory, Christian should never have to feel despair again. Yet
					a character that does not feel despair when nearly drowning would
					not be convincing or sympathetic. Here the author makes a decision
					that goes again the rules of his allegory. In this scene, Christian
					is portrayed as a realistic human who becomes desperate at the brink
					of death. This is not a failure on Bunyan’s part because the scene
					helps make the work a living artistic experience.

The land of Beulah and the Celestial City display a richness
					of sensual detail hardly seen elsewhere in The Pilgrim’s
						Progress. The presence of birds and flowers and the orchards
					and vineyards emphasize a vividness that the landscape rarely had
					before. Similarly, the Celestial City appears in all its grandeur
					through physical descriptions of its pearls and gems and its streets
					paved with gold. The details of the Celestial City exist simply
					to exist, in heavenly simplicity.

The narrator’s conclusion gives a final emphasis of interpretation running
					throughout The Pilgrim’s Progress. The Interpreter
					warned Christian at the outset about the importance of interpreting
					signs and events correctly and spoke darkly about the dangers of
					misinterpreting. The narrator delivers a similar warning here. He
					says that one must not play with the surface details of his story
					but look behind the surface to the essential meaning. The difference
					is that now the one who must interpret is no longer Christian, but
					the reader. The reader takes on the role of a reader of meanings
					that Christian once held. Christian’s quest for understanding is
					the reader’s hands now.

