A high school sophomore. John is a rebellious, handsome young man whose lying, drinking, and smoking mask his concern over what he sees as the emptiness of adult life. Along with Lorraine Jensen, John befriends Mr. Pignati, at first for money and gifts but later for a supportive relationship with an adult figure.

Read an in-depth analysis of John Conlan.

A high school sophomore. Lorraine is a compassionate young woman who wants to become a writer. She constantly tries to analyze her friends and the events that happen to her. Although she feels guilty about lying to Mr. Pignati and taking advantage of his generosity, she mainly follows John’s lead.

Read an in-depth analysis of Lorraine Jensen.

A retired widower in his late fifties. Mr. Pignati lives alone and does not acknowledge the death of his wife. He spends his time at the zoo and considers a baboon named Bobo as a friend. His loneliness causes him to welcome John and Lorraine into his life. He suffers a heart attack and later a second, fatal heart attack.

Read an in-depth analysis of Mr. Pignati.

A single mom who works as a private nurse for terminally ill patients. Lorraine’s mom is a bitter woman whose own experience with an unfaithful husband leads her to be wildly distrustful of all men. She criticizes Lorraine constantly and rarely shows her daughter any love.

A stockbroker in his late fifties. The Bore, as John calls him, argues with John frequently over a clash in values and goals. He believes John is irresponsible, and most of his interactions with John revolve around trying to change or punish him.

A housewife. John calls her the Old Lady and Hyper. She spends most of her time cleaning the house and maintaining perfect appearances. She lets her husband handle all the issues with John and avoids conversations or situations that will lead to any conflict in the home.

A high school classmate. Norton is a social outcast, bully, and thief. He has a reputation for going crazy dating back to childhood. Although Norton hangs out with John, Lorraine, and Dennis, John does not invite Norton to the party because he is likely to cause trouble.

A high school classmate. Dennis is one of the teens who join Lorraine and John in making prank phone calls. He typically hangs out with Norton. John and Lorraine consider him to be unintelligent, but they still hang out with him. He is better friends with Norton than with them, however.

Mr. Pignati’s deceased wife. Mr. Pignati claims she is visiting relatives in California, but John discovers her funeral bill.

