Equality 7-2521 begins the novella
				as a benighted, if exceptional, youth, who has only barely realized
				that he might be different from those around him. He regrets his
				differences and tries to bring himself into conformity. His relationship
				with International 4-8818, his only friend,
				exemplifies the halfhearted attempts he makes to eliminate all his
				preferences for individual people, to care for each brother equally,
				and to be identical to his brothers. After the discovery of the
				tunnel, however, he realizes that solitude pleases him, and it becomes
				harder for him to deny his own individuality.

When Equality 7-2521 meets the
				Golden One, he no longer wants to deny that he prefers some of his
				peers to others. Because he wants to think about her all the time,
				and because the urge is so overwhelming, he gives himself to his
				sin. In so doing, he takes his first major step down the road toward
				breaking with society. Moreover, the Golden One represents Equality 7-2521’s
				first meaningful encounter with another human being. His relationship
				with her baffles him. He knows that he wants to possess her, but
				he does not know why. He admires her haughtiness and her strength,
				and he knows she admires the same things in him, but he does not
				understand why his preference for her is so overpowering.

The discovery of the lightbulb pushes Equality 7-2521 into
				complete rebellion. He now has a cause for which he would give his
				life. Until the moment when the World Council threatens to destroy
				the lightbulb, Equality 7-2521 thinks of
				his brothers and their welfare. Because he will not abide seeing
				the lightbulb destroyed, even though he might tolerate his own destruction,
				he is forced into exile from his society. Equality 7-2521 realizes
				that he actually created the lightbulb for its own sake and that
				he does want to live because his body is strong and youthful and
				beautiful—a realization that severs his last connections to society
				and makes him a free man.

Once he has broken from society, Equality 7-2521 adopts
				a vanity and pride unknown in the society in which he was raised
				and, in so doing, he realizes his manhood. For the first time, Equality 7-2521 feels
				pride at killing his own food and pleasure in eating, and when he
				meets up again with the Golden One, he enjoys sex for the first
				time. The ecstasy he discovers in his body mirrors the ecstasy of his
				mind. By breaking from the confines of society, Equality 7-2521 becomes
				his own man in both his mind and his body.

The abandoned house in the forest represents Equality 7-2521’s ability
				to provide for himself on a permanent basis. He is very proprietary
				about the house and its contents, and it provides the key to his
				epiphany. Upon discovering the “I” while he is reading in the library
				in the house, Equality 7-2521 suddenly becomes
				aware that he is the center of his own universe, and the curse he
				has been fighting is actually a blessing to be embraced. He realizes
				that he is an end in himself and that his happiness is reason enough
				to live. With this epiphany, his transformation is complete. He
				is unafraid and singular, self-important and proud. He has discovered
				himself and become his own man.

Rand intends Equality 7-2521’s
				name to be ironic, since we know that Equality 7-2521 is
				far superior to his peers and does not believe in the doctrine of
				equality. His decision to discard his given name shows his frustration
				with his society, his unwillingness to be held back among the masses.
				In renaming himself Prometheus, Equality 7-2521 shows
				that he identifies himself with the bringer of light, fire, and
				progress in Greek mythology. He considers himself a hero who, like
				Prometheus, must defy the conventions of his time.

