Jack and Howard Dunlop have a German lesson. Jack describes how
					Dunlop sounds as if he were violating the laws of nature when he
					speaks German. Jack tries to tease some personal information out
					of the reticent Dunlop, who volunteers the information that he also
					teaches Greek, Latin, sailing, and meteorology. Dunlop turned to
					meteorology after his mother’s death and found the study of weather
					patterns deeply comforting. 

Jack finds Bob Pardee, Denise’s father and Babette’s ex-husband, at
					his house when he returns from his lesson. Bob takes the three older
					children out to dinner while Jack drives Babette to her tabloid-reading
					appointment at Old Man Treadwell’s. A few minutes after dropping
					her off, Babette comes back to the car and says Mr. Treadwell and
					his elder sister are missing. They report the disappearance to the
					police, then go to meet Bob and the kids at a donut shop. Jack sees
					Babette look carefully and sympathetically at Bob, as if she were
					trying to comprehend the four dramatic years they spent together. 

The next day, the police begin to drag the river in search
					of the Treadwells.

While Heinrich watches the proceedings at the river, word
					comes that the Treadwells have been discovered at the local shopping
					mall, where they’d been for four days. Two of those days were spent
					huddled in a kiosk, while the sister foraged for scraps of food
					from garbage cans. No one knows how the two of them got there or
					why they didn’t call for help. Jack surmises that the Treadwells
					were most likely overwhelmed by the vast strangeness of the mall
					and overcome by their own helplessness.

Before the Treadwells were found in the mall, the police
					called in a psychic named Adele T. to help locate them. She didn’t
					help the police at all in that search, but she did lead them to
					two kilos of heroin, stashed away in an airline bag with a handgun.
					Though Adele has helped the police find evidence of many criminal
					activities, she has always done so when she was looking for something
					else.

Denise comes into Jack’s bedroom and asks him what they
					are going to do about Babette’s memory lapses. She tells Jack that
					she found a bottle of medication buried in the trash. The drug is
					called Dylar, but Denise can’t find references to the drug anywhere.
					Jack tries to reassure Denise, telling her that everyone takes something.
					Denise doesn’t seem comforted, but she drops the subject.

Denise asks Jack why he gave Heinrich that name. Jack
					explains that he thought the name had an air of authority and that
					Heinrich was born shortly after Jack started Hitler studies. Jack
					admits that there is something in the German language and culture
					that he needs, something that makes him feel stronger and bigger.
					Steffie comes into the room, and Jack and the girls go through the
					German-English dictionary together, looking for words that are similar
					in both languages. Heinrich rushes into the room and tells them
					that there’s footage of a plane crash on TV, and the girls run out
					with him. Later that night, the family gathers around the television
					for the weekly Friday ritual. Jack and the children are absorbed
					by the footage of calamity, disaster, and tragedy.

At work on Monday, Murray complains that he’s having trouble establishing
					himself as the department’s Elvis expert. Alfonse Stompanato, the
					department chairman, believes that Dimitros Cotsakis has more authority
					on the subject, because Cotsakis interviewed Presley’s family immediately
					following Elvis’s death and has already appeared on television as
					an expert on the Elvis phenomenon. Jack offers to stop by Murray’s
					lecture to lend his own influence and prestige to Murray’s campaign. 

Jack joins the New York émigrés for lunch. Jack describes Alfonse
					Stompanato, a forceful, charismatic, domineering man. Jack asks
					Alfonse why people are fascinated by watching catastrophes on television.
					Alfonse says that it’s because people are bombarded by information
					every day, and only catastrophes can break through that constant
					flow of data. We crave catastrophes to get our attention, Murray
					argues, as long as they happen somewhere else. He continues by saying
					that people suffer from brain fade, and their senses have gotten
					weary from misuse.

The New York émigrés engage in a kind of storytelling
					battle, as they compare personal anecdotes about moments when they brushed
					their teeth with their fingers or used dirty, run-down toilet facilities.
					Alfonse then challenges each professor to relate where he was when
					James Dean died. Each man has a quick answer, except for Nicholas
					Grappa, who is ridiculed for hesitating.

In earlier chapters, Jack has already demonstrated that
					his interest in Hitler specifically, and German culture generally,
					represents more than a simple academic preoccupation. His discussion
					of his son Heinrich’s name reveals even more about Jack’s investment
					in Germanic studies. Jack notes that he wanted to give his son a
					name with force and power, which German culture represents to Jack.
					The name Heinrich also calls to mind Heinrich Himmler, the chief
					of the German police who was responsible for the Final Solution,
					the systematic extermination of Jewish people during World War II.
					Himmler is a figure surrounded by intrigue, secret plots, and, of
					course, death. Despite—or, perhaps, because of—the grotesqueness
					of a figure like Himmler, his persona also has an undeniable force
					and strength behind it. Heinrich Himmler is certainly a character
					who demands to be reckoned with. 

As Jack notes, some people carry guns, while others wear
					a uniform in order to feel stronger and safer. Jack also seeks safety
					and security, and he finds these things in the German culture’s
					emphasis on strength and in the towering, monumental figure of Adolf
					Hitler, which he metaphorically wraps around himself like a protective mantle.
					Jack is not the only character in White Noise who
					uses his studies to ward off death. In fact, all of the principle
					adult characters in the novel up to this point are teachers, and,
					to some degree, their subjects all relate to death—either as a direct
					engagement with it or an attempt to avoid it. For example, Howard
					Dunlop, Jack’s German teacher, turns to meteorology after his mother’s
					death as a way of finding solace in the world. Even Babette’s posture
					classes are an attempt to keep death away: her elderly students
					train their bodies to be rigorous and upright, as if this would
					help instill a new health and vigor in them.

The Treadwells’ ordeal in the mall, like Jack’s experience
					in the supermarket, again parodies consumer culture. However, while
					the supermarket proves both rejuvenating and fascinating to people
					like Jack and Murray, the shopping mall ends up being a terrifying
					place. The mall is so vast and overwhelming that it literally swallows
					the individual. The supposed consumers end up consumed themselves. The
					Treadwells are old, and to them the scale of the mall is more than
					they can bear. Unable to participate as consumers, they huddle in
					a kiosk, scavenging for food as if they were homeless in a city. Throughout
					the novel, everyday, mundane events, objects, and locations become
					imbued with a mystical or supernatural force, rendering otherwise
					recognizable entities as alien and strange. This process of defamiliarization
					can sometimes lead to a sublime, transcendent experience, but just
					as often it proves harrowing. 

When the police bring in a psychic to help find the Treadwells, Jack
					notes, “the American mystery deepens.” The police approach the psychic
					searching for one thing and instead find another, but they never
					find the connection they were searching for. For someone like Jack,
					who obsessively searches out connections in order to create meaning,
					mystery itself represents a dark, powerful force. Mystery appears
					in the absence of connections. It defies logic and thwarts efforts
					to create a cohesive meaning around one’s life. And, of course,
					mystery is almost always part of plot. The mysteriously beautiful
					sunsets continue to captivate Jack and the family, and as Jack notes,
					they are either ominous or spectacles of pleasure—and perhaps both. 

