The narrator not only tells the story of Invisible
Man, he is also its principal character. Because Invisible Man is
a bildungsroman (a type of novel that chronicles a character’s moral
and psychological growth), the narrative and thematic concerns of
the story revolve around the development of the narrator as an individual. Additionally,
because the narrator relates the story in the first person, the
text doesn’t truly probe the consciousness of any other figure in
the story. Ironically, though he dominates the novel, the narrator
remains somewhat obscure to the reader; most notably, he never reveals
his name. The names that he is given in the hospital and in the
Brotherhood, the name of his college, even the state in which the
college is located—these all go unidentified. The narrator remains
a voice and never emerges as an external and quantifiable presence.
This obscurity emphasizes his status as an “invisible man.”

For much of the story, and especially in the
chapters before he joins the Brotherhood, the narrator remains extremely
innocent and inexperienced. He is prone to think the best of people
even when he has reason not to, and he remains consistently respectful of
authority. The narrator’s innocence sometimes causes him to misunderstand
important events in the story, often making it necessary for the
reader to look past the narrator’s own interpretation of events
in order to see Ellison’s real intentions. Ellison uses heavy irony
to allow the reader to see things that the narrator misses. After
the “battle royal” in Chapter 1, for instance, the narrator accepts
his scholarship from the brutish white men with gladness and gratitude.
Although he passes no judgment on the white men’s behavior, the
men’s actions provide enough evidence for the reader to denounce
the men as appalling racists. While the narrator can be somewhat
unreliable in this regard, Ellison makes sure that the reader perceives
the narrator’s blindness.

Further, because the narrator supposedly writes his story
as a memoir and not while it is taking place, he also comes to recognize his
former blindness. As a result, just as a division exists between Ellison
and the narrator, a division arises between the narrator as a narrator
and the narrator as a character. Ellison renders the narrator’s
voice as that of a man looking back on his experiences with greater
perspective, but he ensures that the reader sees into the mind of
the still-innocent character. He does so by having the narrator recall
how he perceived of events when they happened rather than offer commentary
on these events with the benefit of hindsight.

The narrator’s innocence prevents him from
recognizing the truth behind others’ errant behavior and leads him
to try to fulfill their misguided expectations. He remains extremely
vulnerable to the identity that society thrusts upon him as an African
American. He plays the role of the servile black man to the white
men in Chapter 1; he plays the industrious, uncomplaining disciple of
Booker T. Washington during his college years; he agrees to act as
the Brotherhood’s black spokesperson, which allows the Brotherhood
to use him. But the narrator also proves very intelligent and deeply
introspective, and as a result, he is able to realize the extent
to which his social roles limit him from discovering his individual
identity. He gradually assumes a mask of invisibility in order to
rebel against this limitation. 

The narrator first dons the mask after his falling-out
with the Brotherhood, in Chapter 22. He becomes even more invisible
in Chapter 23, when, escaping Ras’s henchmen, he disguises
himself behind dark glasses and a hat, unintentionally inducing
others to mistake him for the nebulous Rinehart. Finally, in Chapter 25, he retreats underground. Yet, in the act of telling
his story, the narrator comes to realize the danger of invisibility:
while it preempts others’ attempts to define him, it also preempts
his own attempts to define and express himself. He concludes his
story determined to honor his own complexity rather than subdue
it in the interest of a group or ideology. Though most of the narrator’s
difficulties arise from the fact that he is black, Ellison repeatedly
emphasized his intent to render the narrator as a universal character,
a representation of the struggle to define oneself against societal
expectations.

Take the Analysis of Major Characters Quick Quiz

