The Minister of the Interior comes into power during the
				two years Alex is incarcerated. As the highest-ranking representative
				of the State, the Minister embodies the government’s changing attitude toward
				its citizens. The government he represents is even more repressive
				than the one Alex knows in Part One, and its cardinal virtue is
				the stability of society. To achieve this goal, the Minister has put
				two sweeping policies into effect with regard to criminal behavior.
				For already-incarcerated offenders, the Minister has decided to move
				ahead with an experimental rehabilitation program that destroys
				criminal tendencies. In this way, he can free up jail space for political
				dissidents, who threaten the new State order. In his other policy
				modification, the Minister gives badges to the remaining street
				thugs so that these violent criminals can authoritatively impose
				social order. 

With the character of the Minister, Burgess satirizes
				the tendency of socialist governments to overlook the needs and
				rights of individuals who threaten communal order. Personal liberties
				mean nothing to the Minister, and neither do principles. He candidly
				admits to having sacrificed Alex’s individual, human qualities in
				exchange for a passive young man who can’t help but act in a socially
				acceptable manner. In these ways, the Minister differs from both
				F. Alexander and P.R. Deltoid. Unlike the former, he doesn’t care
				about principles, and, unlike the latter, he doesn’t bother to study
				the origins of violence. Rather, the Minister possesses a distinctly
				utilitarian attitude toward accomplishing the goal of total State
				security. Ironically, this acutely pragmatic attitude also prompts
				the Minister to cure Alex, when the Minister realizes that he needs
				Alex’s endorsement to quell the public outrage stirred up by F.
				Alexander. In ensuring society’s stability, the Minister always
				observes the following mantra: “The point is that it works.” 

