Suddenly, a massive black beast swoops down upon Théoden,
					hitting his horse with a poisoned dart. The steed rears up, and
					the king falls beneath his horse, crushed. The Lord of the Nazgûl
					looms above on the back of his flying steed. Terrified, Théoden’s
					guards flee in panic—all but Dernhelm. Thrown from his horse but unharmed,
					Dernhelm challenges the Black Captain. Merry, crawling on all fours
					in a daze, hears Dernhelm speak, and he recognizes the warrior’s
					voice. Dernhelm throws back his hood and reveals to the Nazgûl that
					he is in fact Éowyn, the Lady of Rohan, in disguise.

The winged steed strikes at Éowyn, but she deals it a
					fatal wound. The Black Captain leaps off his dead mount and shatters
					Éowyn’s shield with a blow from his club, breaking her arm. He raises
					his spiked club again, but just before he strikes, Merry sneaks
					up behind him and stabs the Nazgûl through the leg. Bowed over,
					the creature lets out a terrible shriek. Éowyn, with her final strength, slashes
					at his face with her sword, the blade shattering upon impact. The
					Black Captain’s armor falls shapeless at Éowyn’s feet, and his crown
					rolls away. Éowyn collapses on top of the Nazgûl’s remains.

The dying King Théoden appoints Éomer as his heir. Éomer,
					seeing his sister Éowyn’s fallen body, leads the Rohirrim in a furious attack.
					The men of Minas Tirith, led by Imrahil, Prince of Dol Amroth, emerge
					from the city and drive the enemy from the gate. Théoden’s body
					is taken to the city, along with Éowyn, but Imrahil alerts her rescuers
					that she is not dead.

The allies of Mordor reassemble as new soldiers of Sauron
					arrive from Osgiliath. The men of Rohan and Gondor dwindle. As the
					tide turns against Gondor again, a fleet of black ships appears
					on the Anduin River. The defenders of Gondor turn for the city at
					the sight of the enemy ships. Éomer, though he realizes he is defeated,
					continues to fight bravely, laughing in a mix of hope and despair.

Suddenly, the frontmost black ship unfurls a banner bearing
					the white tree of Gondor and the seven stars and crown of Elendil—the symbols
					of the ancient kingdom of Gondor. Aragorn has arrived in the black
					ships, along with the Rangers of the North, Legolas, Gimli, and
					reinforcements from the southern kingdoms. Wielding the legendary
					sword Andúril, reforged and burning like a star, Aragorn leads a
					fierce battle to save Gondor. The armies of Mordor are defeated,
					and Aragorn, Éomer, and Imrahil return to the city.

This chapter marks a turning point in The Lord
						of the Rings. The conflict established in The Fellowship
						of the Ring remains unresolved, but a great tension accumulated
					over the second and third volumes of the novel finds some resolution
					in these chapters. The forces of Men from the west have been slowly
					gathering and moving steadily to the east, just as the armies and
					allies of Sauron have equally organized and spread west, marked
					by the ever-expanding cloud of Darkness over the land. Gandalf’s
					earlier metaphor of the chess game is apt, for the opposing forces
					have arrayed themselves and now make strategic moves in turn. In
					terms of chess, the armies of Gondor successfully capture Mordor’s
					queen by killing the Lord of the Nazgûl, the Black Captain. The
					Darkness overhead dissipates as Mordor’s forces retreat to huddle
					around their stationary king, Sauron.

Gondor’s ultimate salvation, however, arrives in a manner
					that upsets the black-against-white, East-against-West conflict.
					Aragorn emerges from the South, aided by a sea breeze that the characters sense
					throughout the chapter. Moreover, he comes riding in Mordor’s own
					dark ships, complicating the distinction between the forces of good
					and evil. Aragorn’s unusual entrance via the Paths of the Dead suggests
					that his claim to the throne extends over both East and West, the
					living and the dead. Furthermore, Aragorn’s sword, Andúril—reforged
					after centuries of remaining broken—symbolizes the reunification
					of the lands and peoples Sauron has divided.

As the most detailed account of hand-to-hand combat in
					Tolkien’s third volume, this chapter offers numerous portrayals
					of heroic courage on the part of Théoden and his Riders. Personally,
					Tolkien was wary of the archetype of courage found in the heroes
					of the Norse sagas and myths he studied. Tolkien commented that
					heroic courage was a “potent but terrifying solution.” The blind
					or impulsive courage of the unrestrained hero may be effective,
					but it is not necessarily admirable. Tolkien instead prefers to
					emphasize the heroism of those whose courageous deeds arise from
					their ideals and a sense of moral obligation. Éomer demonstrates
					great bravery in his maniacal drive to keep fighting even after
					Gondor seems lost. Yet the true heroes of the battle are those who
					sacrifice their lives in combat, not because it comes naturally,
					but because of their sense of responsibility and commitment.

Tolkien explores the ideas of valor and self-sacrifice
					by casting two unlikely candidates—Éowyn and Merry—in the role of
					hero. Both characters represent somewhat marginalized segments of
					the population of Middle-earth—Hobbits and women. The conspicuous
					scarcity of women in The Lord of the Rings highlights
					the irony of Éowyn’s sacrifice for Théoden. The pampered and repressed Lady
					offers her life for Théoden and manages to slay the terrifying Lord
					of the Nazgûl, whom no man has been able to defeat. Éowyn, to secure
					the opportunity to act, has had to show cunning, care, and dedication
					to the cause of Rohan. Ironically, to become a hero she has had
					to resort to deceit, disguising herself to show that her deeds arise
					from the quality of her character rather than from the privilege of
					her position or her gender.

Merry also plays a role in slaying the Black Captain,
					though his heroism emerges from a sense of moral obligation and
					duty rather than stealth or cunning. When Merry and Dernhelm (Éowyn)
					are thrown from their horse before the Nazgûl, Merry finds himself crawling
					on the ground, crying and whimpering. In his heart, he berates himself
					for his lack of courage, thinking, “King’s man! . . . You must stay
					by him.” When Merry sees the Nazgûl strike Éowyn, he responds out
					of pity, wonder, and the “slow-kindled courage of his race.” Merry’s
					courage represents Tolkien’s ideal of heroism—unobsequious, reflective,
					and unexpected. As T.A. Shippey notes, Tolkien’s ideal—as represented
					in the novel’s main protagonists, Sam and Frodo—is Hobbit heroism,
					not human heroism.

