“[I]t was Gondor that brought about its
						own decay . . . thinking that the Enemy was asleep, who was only banished
						not destroyed.”

Sam falls asleep and awakens to find Faramir interrogating
					Frodo. Faramir wants to know why the hobbits originally set out
					from Rivendell, and under what circumstances they parted with Boromir. Faramir
					knows of a prophecy that states that a Halfling will arrive bearing
					something of great value, and he asks Frodo what this object is.
					Frodo answers only that he is on an errand to deliver the object
					elsewhere. Frodo makes a great effort not to speak ill of Boromir,
					even though Boromir tried to seize the Ring for himself. Faramir,
					knowing that Boromir is dead and attempting to trick Frodo, announces
					that Boromir will clear up everything when he arrives. Frodo, however,
					is unaware of Boromir’s death. Faramir hints that he suspects Frodo
					of betraying Boromir.

Faramir reveals to Frodo that Boromir is his brother.
					He asks Frodo whether he recalls any particular object Boromir possessed, and
					Frodo remembers Boromir’s horn. Faramir recounts how once he was
					staring at the sea, and either in a dream or in real life he saw Boromir
					floating by on a boat, his horn broken. Faramir says he knew that
					Boromir was sailing to the land of the dead, and that he had been
					killed. Frodo says that it must have been a mere vision, as Boromir
					had undertaken to go home across the fields of Rohan, far from water.
					Faramir addresses the dead Boromir in deep grief, asking for answers
					to his questions about what happened to Boromir before death. Faramir
					knows that there has been some wrongdoing, but he no longer suspects
					Frodo.

Faramir announces to the hobbits that he must take them
					back to Minas Tirith, the great city of Gondor. On the way, Faramir
					commends Frodo’s truthfulness, though fully aware that Frodo has withheld
					the fact that the hobbits did not like Boromir. Faramir tries again
					to extract information about the valuable object—which he knows
					only as Isildur’s Bane—that he knows Frodo is carrying. Faramir
					suspects that Isildur’s Bane killed Boromir, perhaps because it
					caused contention among the men. Frodo answers that there was no
					fighting in the ranks, and Faramir understands that the cause of the
					problem was Boromir alone.

When the woodlands begin to grow thinner, Faramir orders
					his men to blindfold Frodo and Sam so that they will not know the
					location of the hideout where they are headed. When the blindfolds
					are removed, the hobbits see the splendid Window of the Sunset,
					as Faramir calls the waterfall-covered window of the cave in which they
					are hiding.

Faramir offers Frodo and Sam food and drink. While they
					eat, Faramir recounts the former glory of the kingdom of Gondor
					and its later slide into weakness as the kingdom offered land to
					the Rohirrim in exchange for military defense. As they talk, Sam
					accidentally blurts out the fact that Boromir had sought to get
					the Ring. Faramir is shocked that his brother was guilty, but he
					appreciates Sam’s honesty, and affirms that he has no interest in
					getting the Ring for himself. Frodo tells Faramir of his own mission
					to throw the Ring into the Crack of Doom to destroy it. Faramir
					is astonished.

Frodo’s tense encounter with Faramir, who initially suspects
					the hobbit of being responsible for the death of Boromir, is an
					important plot development in several ways. First, the episode brings
					unity to the two disparate halves of The Two Towers by
					bringing us back to the first chapter, in which Boromir’s death
					is recounted. Now, near the end of this volume of the novel, we
					hear about the death of Boromir once again, but from a different
					perspective that gives us information we were not offered before.
					In circling back in the novel in this manner, Tolkien again reminds
					us that everything in The Lord of the Rings comes
					back to where it started—the Ring. Moreover, the new point of view
					on Boromir’s demise reminds us of the emotional consequences of
					the bloodshed in the novel, an aspect that sometimes is overlooked.
					We hear of the death of Boromir in the first chapter of The
						Two Towers, but do not grieve over it much, having little
					familiarity with Boromir, even after reading The Fellowship
						of the Ring. We judge Boromir’s death mainly in terms of what
					it means for the hobbits’ mission. But here, when we watch Faramir
					sorrowfully address his dead brother, begging for answers to his
					questions about Boromir’s death, we are reminded that the death
					carries with it a great emotional burden for Faramir. In a novel in
					which death is so widespread, Tolkien does well to remind us that these
					deaths, however numerous and sometimes anonymous, have an emotional
					importance above their status as mere plot points.

The episode with Faramir also shows us a new side of Frodo.
					The hobbit has suffered all manner of hardships in the novel, but
					he has never had to face an interrogation of the sort that Faramir
					forces upon him. Frodo could easily escape Faramir’s suspicions
					simply by stating the truth: that Boromir was a traitor who sought
					possession of the Ring himself, betraying the Fellowship. But Frodo
					refuses to admit the truth out of regard for Faramir’s honorable
					memory of his late brother. Of course, Boromir was not completely
					evil, and for a while he was the solid ally of the hobbits; in this
					regard, Frodo may be attempting to pay tribute to his former colleague.
					But the fact remains that, in his conversation with Faramir, Frodo
					sacrifices his own comfort and honor to preserve the good memory
					of someone who betrayed him. The nobility of Frodo’s act is impressive
					indeed. When we watch how well he holds up under pressure from the
					accusatory Faramir, we develop a deeper respect for the hobbit’s
					empathy and strength of character.

Faramir’s reaction to the news of his brother’s ignoble
					behavior is itself highly noble. Faramir does not curse Frodo and
					Sam as the bearers of bad tidings, nor does he label them liars,
					unable to believe or process the fact that his beloved elder brother
					could be capable of treachery. On the contrary, Faramir accepts
					the hobbits’ story with grace and calm. His acceptance of the distressing
					truth about his brother may suggest that Faramir is, on some level,
					well aware of the possibility of good turning to evil in the world.
					Faramir continues to exhibit this awareness in his touching recount
					of the fall of Gondor from a land of peace and prosperity to a realm
					of wickedness and corruption. The inhabitants of Gondor, Faramir
					explains, grew spoiled by their easy lives, and forgot about the
					necessity of constantly striving for good and defending themselves
					against evil. Faramir does not mention his brother in his tale,
					but indeed we might say the same things about Boromir—a good man
					who, in the face of temptation, became open to corruption and evil.

