On his fourteenth birthday, Frank goes to the post office
					to start work, but learns that he is not scheduled to begin until
					the following Monday. The people working at the office laugh at
					Frank’s raggedy clothes. Aunt Aggie takes her nephew shopping for
					new clothing, and gives him money to buy a cup of tea and a bun.

	The next Monday, Frank starts work. He is a temporary
					worker, which means that he receives less pay than the permanent
					workers and cannot stay at his job beyond the age of sixteen. One
					of the first telegrams he delivers is to Paddy Clohessy’s mother.
					Her house, which used to be a pit of illness and filth, is now filled
					with new furniture, bright clothes, and good food. She tells Frank
					that one day after her husband, Dennis, was craving sheep’s tongue
					and Paddy stole one for him, Dennis leaped up and said he refused
					to die in bed. He went to England, as did Paddy, and both father
					and son now send money to Mrs. Clohessy. She remarks that were it
					not for Hitler, she would be dead.

	Frank gets his wages, the first pound he has ever had.
					When Michael tells Frank he is hungry and asks for a scrap of bread,
					Frank takes Michael to get fish and chips and lemonade, then to
					a movie, where they eat chocolate, and then out for tea and buns.
					Afterward, Frank thinks that instead of buying food with his wages,
					he should save each week so that he can go to America when he turns
					twenty.

	The only people who tip the telegram boys are widows,
					the poor, and the wives of Protestant ministers. Rich people don’t
					tip, and neither do nuns or priests. Some of the people to whom
					Frank delivers telegrams are so old and sick that they cannot get
					out of bed. Although it could cost him his job, Frank helps these
					people by cashing their money orders and bringing them their groceries.

	When school begins, Michael starts staying with Frank
					in Ab Sheehan’s house. Angela comes to see her sons, and goes back
					to Laman’s less and less frequently, until finally she has moved
					into Ab’s altogether. Frank’s brother Malachy returns from Dublin
					a few months later, and the family is reunited. Despite the fact
					that Frank gives most of his paycheck to Angela, he still enjoys
					work, since he gets to cycle in the countryside and dream about
					the future.

	One day, Frank delivers a telegram to the house of a
					seventeen-year-old consumptive girl named Theresa Carmody. Frank
					arrives soaked with rain, and bloodied from a fall on his bike.
					Theresa tends to his injuries by putting iodine on his cuts, and
					tells him to take his pants off to dry by the fire. He does, and
					when she comes into the room, she leads him to the green couch,
					where they make love. Theresa is bleeding, and thinking she is cut,
					Frank pour iodine on her. Frank goes back to see Theresa for weeks,
					and when Theresa is not too ill, they make love on the couch. One
					day Frank is told to deliver the telegram to Theresa’s mother’s
					workplace. When he does, he learns that Theresa is in the hospital.
					The next week, Theresa dies. Frank worries that she is in hell because
					they have had sexual relations outside of marriage, and he fasts
					and prays and goes to Mass to beg for God to have mercy on Theresa’s
					soul.

Frank delivers a condolence telegram to an Englishman
					named Mr. Harrington, who has lost his wife. Mr. Harrington, who
					has been drinking, insults the Irish and tries to force Frank to
					sit and mourn with him. He makes Frank drink sherry. When Mr. Harrington
					goes to get more alcohol, Frank is left with the corpse. He starts
					wondering if he can save her, a Protestant, from eternal damnation.
					He decides to baptize her with the sherry, and as he does this,
					Mr. Harrington comes back and finds him. Mr. Harrington stuffs a
					ham sandwich in Frank’s mouth, and Frank vomits out the window onto Mrs.
					Harrington’s rosebushes. Frank then escapes by jumping through the
					window into the rosebushes and vomit below. Mr. Harrington reports
					Frank and gets him fired, but the priest writes a letter to the
					post office, and Frank is rehired.

	Frank delivers a telegram to an old woman creditor named
					Mrs. Brigid Finucane. Frank agrees to write bullying letters to
					her debtors in return for a few shillings. He uses difficult and
					obscure words in the letters, which intimidate the debtors into
					paying. Some of the recipients of the letters are Frank’s friends
					and neighbors, and Angela says that whoever is writing the letters
					should be boiled in oil, but Frank justifies his behavior to himself
					by thinking of how badly he wants to get to America.

	Frank plans to take the exam to get a permanent job at
					the post office, but Pa Keating sketches out the nice, safe, boring
					life that would ensue: a wife, five children, and numbness. Pa Keating
					says, “You’ll be dead in your head before you’re thirty and dried
					in your ballocks the year before.” Consequently, Frank decides to
					take a job delivering Protestant newspapers for a man named Mr.
					McCaffrey.

	When Frank’s boss, Mrs. O’Connell, hears that Frank walked away
					from the post office exam, she acts hurt and offended that he fancies
					himself too good for the postman position.

Frank makes a crucial realization that he must save part
					of the money he earns or else face remaining in Limerick forever.
					It is a mark of Frank’s maturity and drive that even though he is
					nearly starving, he is able to think not of food, and his new ability
					to buy food, but of the abstract desire to make a new life for himself in America.

	Frank continues to grow more conscious of class differences.
					He sounds bitter when he says, “If you waited for tips from priests
					or nuns you’d die on their doorstep,” and he commiserates with the woman
					who points out the hypocrisy of those priests and nuns, who drink
					wine and eat ham and eggs, yet insist that their parishioners should
					not rail against poverty, since Jesus himself was poor. His job,
					which takes him to the houses of the sick and impoverished, makes
					him even more tenderhearted toward the poor. He says it is impossible
					to refuse anything to a woman who is little more than a pile of
					old rags, to a man who lost his legs in the war, or to a mother with
					two crippled children.

	The sexual relationship between Frank and Theresa is
					both lovely and difficult for Frank. The first time they have sex,
					he describes it this way: “my head is filled with sin and iodine
					and fear of consumption and the shilling tip and her green eyes
					and she’s on the sofa don’t stop or I’ll die and she’s crying and
					I’m crying.” This description contains all of the complexity of
					Frank’s first sexual experience: it is a sin in the eyes of the
					Catholic church, Theresa has just tenderly cared for his wounds,
					she is sick and dying, she is far richer than he, she is beautiful,
					what they are doing feels good, but the situation is so complicated
					and emotional that they both cry.

	Mr. Harrington tells Frank, with bitter anger, that all
					Irish people are ghouls, all Irish people are alcoholics, all Irish
					people whine, all Irish people are starving. When Frank asks for
					lemonade instead of sherry or whiskey, Harrington forces him to
					live up to his own stereotypes by foisting sherry on Frank. When
					Frank refuses a ham sandwich, Harrington literally shoves the food
					into Frank’s mouth to prove himself correct in his idea that all
					Irish are starving. In a symbolic move, Frank throws up the food
					Harrington forced on him. It seems that McCourt is suggesting that
					stereotypes, even those that are rammed down your throat, must be
					violently cast off. McCourt does not lay the blame entirely at the
					doorstep of rich Protestants like Mr. Harrington, for when Frank
					returns to the post office, his version of the story falls on deaf
					ears. His boss describes Mr. Harrington as a “lovely Englishman
					that sounds like James Mason.” McCourt suggests that Irish people
					like Frank’s boss make the problem worse by accepting Hollywood’s
					version of the English rather than thinking for themselves.

	When Pa Keating tells Frank, “Make up your own bloody
					mind and to hell with the safeshots and the begrudgers,” he puts
					himself in a class with Mr. Timoney and Mr. O’Halloran, men in Frank’s
					life who encourage him to reach beyond the confines of Limerick
					and do something daring with his life. McCourt presents Frank’s
					decision to leave the safety of a pensioned job at the post office
					not simply as a product of Frank’s bravery, but as the result of
					the encouragement of these good men.

	Frank’s decision to leave Limerick does not meet with
					everyone’s approval. By writing of Mrs. O’Connell’s anger, McCourt
					shows us that when one refuses to accept the limits imposed by his
					poverty, those who did accept the limits tend to
					become resentful.

