Francisco comes to Dagny’s apartment to try again to convince
					her to quit, but she cannot give up the railroad. Suddenly, Rearden enters
					the apartment. He sees Francisco and is furious. Francisco is stunned
					to see that Dagny is sleeping with Rearden. Rearden remembers Francisco’s
					oath of love to one woman and asks if Dagny is the one. When Francisco
					says yes, Rearden slaps him. It takes all the self-restraint Francisco
					can manage not to retaliate, and Rearden realizes how much this
					man loves him. Francisco concedes that based on what he knows, Rearden
					is still correct in denouncing him. He leaves the apartment. 

Dagny receives a letter from Quentin Daniels, who is resigning. Although
					he will still work on the motor, he will not accept her money, since
					he does not want the motor to be used by the looters. Dagny calls
					him and makes him promise to wait for her to come and see him. She
					calls Eddie and tells him to hold the Comet for her. She will go
					west to look into the tunnel accident and to find Daniels. 

Eddie comes to Dagny’s apartment to get instructions while
					she packs. When he sees Rearden’s dressing gown in her closet, he
					is stunned to realize they are lovers and that he has also been
					in love with Dagny for years. Later, he goes to eat dinner at the
					Taggart Cafeteria with the worker. He tells him that he has always
					liked his face because it looks like the face of a man who has never
					known pain or fear or guilt. He tells him Dagny is going to find
					Quentin Daniels and also tells him about the motor. When he mentions
					his love for Dagny and his shock at learning about her and Rearden,
					the worker hurries away. 

Dagny is shaken by the desolation she passes as she rides
					west on the Comet. As she steps out of her private car, she sees
					a conductor removing a hobo from the vestibule. Something in his
					dignity strikes her, and she invites him in. His name is Jeff Allen,
					and he used to work for the Twentieth Century Motor Company. He
					tells her the story of what happened at the plant when Starnes’s
					heirs began their disastrous policies. Every six months, the workers
					would come together to vote on each person’s needs. If it was decided
					that anyone was not producing enough, that man was made to work
					extra unpaid hours. Eventually, all the workers lost their dignity.
					The honest men were punished, and the rest learned to manipulate
					the system and hide their abilities. The first man to quit was named
					John Galt. He swore he would end the absurdity and stop the motor
					of the world. After the factory closings and failures that followed, Allen
					and his coworkers began to think he had succeeded, and they coined
					the phrase Who is John Galt?


The train stops suddenly. Like many trains lately, it
					has been deserted by its crew, who simply disappear. Dagny is relieved
					to find Owen Kellogg on the train, but he is on his way to a month’s
					vacation and will not help, though he does accompany her to a track phone
					to call for help. On the way, he asks her why she continues to work
					for the looters even now. He also smokes the mysterious cigarettes
					stamped with the dollar sign. Dagny continues on to a nearby airstrip,
					where she rents a plane. When she lands, she learns that Quentin
					Daniels has just taken off in another plane. Fearing the destroyer
					has taken him, she takes off and follows them. She crashes in the
					remote Colorado mountains. 

The scene in Dagny’s apartment illustrates how much Francisco
					has had to give up to follow his mission and how important it is
					to him. Not only has he given up on d’Anconia Copper and allowed
					his personal reputation to be destroyed, he has given up the only
					woman he ever loved and betrayed Rearden, a man he loves and respects.
					The strength required to stay on his course in the face of all he
					has lost is illustrated in the moment after Rearden slaps him and
					he does not retaliate, instead acknowledging that Rearden is right
					to denounce him. Whatever he is accomplishing by withdrawing from
					the looters’ world must be very important indeed. 

We can now be certain that the track worker with whom
					Eddie dines must be connected to the destroyer in some way. It is
					no coincidence that Daniels (and earlier, Dannager) disappeared
					immediately after Eddie happened to mention to the track worker
					Dagny’s plans to try to stop them. Furthermore, the worker’s interest
					in Dagny seems personal, given his abrupt reaction to learning she
					and Rearden are lovers. 

Rand uses Jeff Allen’s detailed account of the chaos at
					the Twentieth Century Motor Company to illustrate the devastating
					effects of collectivism. For Rand, the ideas behind the plant’s
					radical management are not just bad ideas, they are pure evil. She
					intends the plant’s story to be an object lesson in the perils of
					Communism. Under the system at the plant, income was based on need,
					not performance. Using need as a basis for policy is the system’s
					fundamental flaw, for a number of reasons. First, need has no absolute definitions;
					what is a need to one person may be a luxury to another. Second,
					rewarding income based on need removes incentive. If production
					is separated from income, there is no reason to produce, since a
					worker will receive income anyway. Finally, ability becomes a liability
					when those determined to be ablest are given more work but not more
					income. The biggest winner under such a system is the person with
					the most need and the least ability. This fact makes it inevitable
					that a community should dissolve into chaos and mistrust, and that
					production should cease. From Jeff Allen, Dagny also learns the
					true story of John Galt. She now knows that he is a real person
					and that he was the first to resign from the plant. His vow to “stop
					the motor of the world” indicates that he may be the destroyer she
					seeks. He may also be the inventor of the motor. She is more determined
					than ever to find him. 

