The protagonist and narrator of the story. Paul’s journal entries make up the story. Paul’s vision is impaired after an accident that happened as a child. He’s been told that he looked at an eclipse too long and burned his eyes, but he can’t recall the event. Paul fears his older brother Erik, who acts like a bully. Paul loves soccer and hopes to find his place at his new school by becoming part of the team.

Read an in-depth analysis of Paul Fisher.

Paul’s older brother. Erik is a football star. He also played soccer but decided to switch to football when he was eleven when he realized being a football player would bring him more attention. Erik is cruel, unsympathetic, and violent.

Read an in-depth analysis of Erik Fisher.

Mother of Paul and Erik. Mrs. Fisher is a highly organized woman who prides herself on her efficiency and attention to detail. Her conscientiousness lands her a position on the Architectural Committee of her development community just days after she moves in. Mrs. Fisher is close with Paul and wants to protect him, but she also wants her family to look good in the community.

Read an in-depth analysis of Mrs. Fisher.

Father of Paul and Erik. Mr. Fisher’s new job in the Department of Civil Engineering in Tangerine County is the reason the family moves east. He regrets not pursuing his own football career at Ohio State University, and he is obsessed with Erik’s football career. Mr. Fisher lost his parents when he was young.

Read an in-depth analysis of Mr. Fisher.

Paul’s first friend in Florida. Joey’s family also lives in the Lake Windsor housing development. His brother Mike dies after being struck by lightning on the football field. Joey’s father is a lawyer. Joey joins Paul at Tangerine Middle School after a sinkhole destroys part of their community’s middle school. Joey is racist and doesn’t get along with the kids at Paul’s school, so he returns to Lake Windsor Middle School.

Theresa’s and Tino’s older brother. Luis left school to support his family after their mother died. He acts as a father figure to his siblings. Luis devotes himself to his family’s citrus farm and is developing a new tangerine called the Golden Dawn that his sister, Theresa, and Paul do a science report on for school. Luis tries to avenge his brother after Erik strikes him. Erik’s friend Arthur strikes Luis in the head with a blackjack, causing Luis to have an aneurysm and die. Luis’s death motivates Paul to tell the truth about what he saw Erik and Arthur do.

Luis’s sister and Tino’s twin sister. Theresa is assigned to show Paul around Tangerine Middle School when he is first transferred there. She and Paul become friends and do a science report together on Luis’s Golden Dawn tangerine. Theresa often acts like a mediator between Paul and her family and the other kids in school.

Luis’s brother and Theresa’s twin brother. Tino plays soccer on the Tangerine War Eagles. After Erik punches Tino in the Fishers’ backyard, Luis goes after Erik to avenge Tino. Tino gives Paul trouble at first but comes to respect Paul after he sees how devoted Paul is to the Cruz family’s citrus farm and after Paul helps him when he attacks Erik at the Senior Awards Ceremony.

The captain of the Tangerine War Eagles. He harasses Paul at first, as he does anyone who is new to the team. Victor likes attention and is a very team-oriented player. He tells Paul that now that he’s a War Eagle, they’re brothers. Victor helps Tino avenge Luis’s murder by attacking Erik and Arthur with him.

Runs the Tangerine Times, a local newspaper. Mr. Donnelly was an amateur athlete when he was younger and takes a special interest in local sports. He also lives in the Lake Windsor Downs housing development. Mr. Donnelly puts up several lightning rods on his house, irritating Mrs. Fisher. Mr. Donnelly is the person Antoine visits to admit his true address. Mr. Donnelly later runs a special section in the newspaper vouching for Antoine’s character, saying his football record should not be forfeited.

The coach of the Windsor Seagulls football team. Coach Warner prioritizes football over everything else. He doesn’t cancel practice after Mike Costello’s death and is reluctant to move practice time to keep the players safe from the daily lightning strikes at 4 p.m. Coach Warner also knows about Antoine’s secret.

The Lake Windsor soccer coach. He kicks Paul off the team once he finds out Paul is an insurance risk because he is an IEP student. Coach Walski has no sympathy for Paul. When his team plays the War Eagles, he spots Paul and also notices how well Paul’s doing. He then tries to get Paul disqualified from playing.

Erik’s sidekick. Arthur is “going nowhere” in life. He beats people up for Erik and robs homes in the development community while Erik waits in the car. Arthur gets arrested for the murder of Luis.

The real star of the Lake Windsor Seagulls football team. Antoine lives in Tangerine County, not Lake Windsor. In the end, Antoine decides to tell everyone the truth about his real address, and he advises Paul to do the same about what he knows about Erik and Arthur. When Antoine’s true address is revealed, all of the Seagulls’ games are forfeited.

Antoine’s sister. Shandra is a high scorer on the Tangerine War Eagles and makes the All County team. Antoine feels guilty she has to hide her name and accomplishments to keep Antoine’s secret about his true address.

Soccer coach for the Tangerine War Eagles soccer team. Betty is tough and a good coach. People respect her. She used to be an Olympic hurdler, but her career ended when someone knocked her over during trials.

A football player at Lake Windsor High. Paul finds Mike well-mannered and respectful. Mike dies early in the novel after getting struck by lightning during practice. Erik and Arthur make fun of the way Mike’s hair was burnt off the side of his head when he was struck. The school plants a laurel tree in honor of him.

Henry D.’s older brother. Wayne is on the volunteer fire department and is hired to spray pesticide across the Lake Windsor Downs community to combat their mosquito problem. Mrs. Fisher is appalled at his casual demeanor when he comes to answer her call about the muck fires at the beginning of the novel.

Wayne’s younger brother and Paul’s friend at Tangerine Middle School. He is a skilled soccer player and on Paul’s science project team.

