I’ve been a parasite all my life. . .
						. I have fed on you and all the men like you who lived before we
						were born. . . . I have taken that which was not mine and given
						nothing in return.

Ellsworth Toohey attends a dinner party hosted by a petulant
					heir with no talents of his own. The guests at the party all speak
					as if they were Toohey’s puppets. The guests revile Wynand and argue
					that unselfishness is the only true virtue. After the party, Toohey
					walks home in a daze of exhilaration.

After Francon retires, Keating gains a reputation for
					being too old-fashioned. Keating puts on weight and becomes dejected
					and bitter. At thirty-nine, he feels lost. On weekends, Keating
					goes to a shack in the woods and paints, which brings him some peace
					but no pleasure. Keating’s last professional chance lies in securing
					a contract for a large housing project called Cortlandt Homes. Keating
					asks Toohey to recommend him to the Cortlandt committee, but Toohey
					receives him coldly. Keating asks why Toohey has abandoned him and
					taken on a new favorite, named Gus Webb. Toohey replies that he
					only backed Keating in order to prevent the rise of truly talented
					men. Toohey then tells Keating that Cortlandt Homes is an architectural challenge
					because it must be cheap to build and easy to maintain. If Keating
					can overcome this challenge, Toohey says, he will back Keating.
					Keating knows that the design is too complicated for him and telephones
					Roark.

For the first time in years, Keating talks to Roark simply
					and honestly. They discuss the Cortlandt project, and Roark asks
					Keating to return to Roark’s office the next day for an answer.
					The next day, Roark says that he will do the project because it
					is a puzzle he wants to solve, and not because of money or pity.
					Roark agrees to let Keating take credit for the plans as long as
					Keating does not change anything in the design. Keating vows to
					fight for Roark’s plans, even though he knows it will be difficult.
					Keating realizes that although he will get the credit and the money,
					Roark will get the pure joy of designing a perfect building. It
					pleases Roark that Keating finally understands which reward is more
					valuable. Keating shows Roark his paintings, which he has never
					shown anyone else, and Roark gently tells Keating it is too late.
					After Keating leaves, Roark feels sick with pity and disgusted that
					society considers pity good.

Roark creates a design that would make the Cortlandt Homes
					economical as well as airy, beautiful, and functional. When Toohey
					sees the drawings, he declares Keating a genius, although he knows Keating
					did not do the designs. Gail Wynand orders every department in the Banner to
					promote Roark, but Wynand’s support works against Roark. The city’s
					intellectuals scorn the paper and anything it supports, including
					Roark. Wynand ignores them and continues his crusade, using his
					influence to win commissions for Roark. One day, Wynand takes Roark
					to his old Hell’s Kitchen neighborhood. He plans to build a great
					skyscraper on the site, and wants Roark to begin dreaming about
					the building with him.

Keating is walking home one day when he runs
					into Katie Halsey. He feels the sting of remorse, but Katie seems
					lively. They have lunch, and Keating discovers a dramatic change
					in Katie. Her spirit is dead, and she speaks only of the joys of
					selflessness and charity. She tells him she suffered when he married
					Dominique, but that she has since learned that it is futile to fight
					fate. Keating tells her that he truly wanted to marry her and that
					the worst sin he ever committed was marrying Dominique. Keating
					asks Katie why people think doing what you really want is easy,
					when it is actually the hardest thing in the world. Katie reprimands
					him for being so selfish and leaves.

Keating and Wynand find themselves questioning their lives,
					and Rand narrates their stories side by side for comparison. Despite
					the great differences between Keating and Wynand, they share the opportunity
					for salvation through Roark. Wynand saves himself; Keating does
					not. Keating represents the sad fate that awaits those too ignorant
					to understand Roark and his values. Roark consistently rescues Keating,
					and only in Chapter 8 does Keating understand
					that Roark helps him for the sake of architecture, not out of pity
					or to gain the upper hand. Without wealth and success to corrupt
					him, Keating finally becomes honest and realizes that architecture
					is not just a means to power but an actual end in itself. He becomes
					even more self-aware upon meeting Katie again. He sees that he has
					ruined her life and deadened her spirit. Keating sees the hollowness
					of his life at this point, but Rand judges him sternly, and Keating’s
					realization comes too late.

	Wynand’s awakening comes at just the right time. Keating
					feels too weary to act on his repentance, but Wynand throws himself
					into the fight against society with vigor. Since the emergence of
					the Banner, Wynand has believed that he controls
					the world, and when he finds that the world actually controls him,
					he spares no effort to fight back. Wynand succeeds where Keating
					fails because Wynand was secretly ready for an awakening, whereas
					Keating’s realizations take him completely by surprise. Keating
					has not marshaled the tools or desire to adapt to Roark’s way of
					living.

	Interestingly, Rand never provides a personal history
					of her protagonist, Howard Roark. Rand details extensive personal
					histories for Keating, Toohey, and Wynand in the sections named
					after them but never explains where or how Roark grew up, even though
					the fourth book of the novel is named after him. We know only that
					he comes from a poor family, though we know nothing about his parents
					or upbringing. Roark’s mysterious past makes his story applicable
					to everyone, as if Rand wants to suggest that background has nothing
					to do with genius or principle. It also makes Roark the perfect
					man. He has no history because he does not change. He is born a
					creator. His lack of a family makes him even more independent and
					free from the influence of others. Anything that is important in his
					past, present, or future resides in his buildings.

This last section does, however, expand our view of Roark
					in two important ways: we get to look inside both his heart and
					his head. Rand does not want Roark to be a completely isolated human,
					and thus, in this section, we see him love Dominique and Wynand. Roark
					also makes two key declarations about his beliefs in life—the first
					on Wynand’s yacht, in Chapter 11, and the
					second during the Cortlandt trial, in Chapter 18—that
					underscore The Fountainhead’s message of independence
					and egoism.

