Silas returns to his cottage, thinking nothing of the
					unlocked door because he has never been robbed before. He is looking
					forward to the roast pork, a gift from a customer, which he left
					cooking while he was running an errand. Noticing nothing out of
					the ordinary, Silas sits down before his fire. He cannot wait to
					pull his money out, and decides to lay it on the table as he eats.

	Silas removes the bricks and finds the hole under the
					floorboards empty. He frantically searches the cottage for his gold,
					desperately hoping that he might have decided to store it someplace
					else for the night. He eventually realizes that the gold is gone,
					and he screams in anguish. Silas then tries to think of what could
					have happened. He initially fears that a greater power removed the
					money to ruin him a second time, but banishes that thought in favor
					of the simpler explanation of a robbery. He mentally runs through
					a list of his neighbors and decides that Jem Rodney, a well-known
					poacher, might have taken the gold.

	Silas decides to declare his loss to the important people
					of the town, including Squire Cass, in the hopes that they might
					be able to help recover his money. Silas goes to the Rainbow, the
					village inn and tavern, to find someone of authority. However, the
					more prominent citizens of Raveloe are all at the birthday dance
					we saw Godfrey anticipating earlier, so Silas finds only the “less
					lofty customers” at the tavern. The Rainbow has two rooms, separating
					patrons according to their social standing. The parlor, frequented
					by Squire Cass and others of “select society,” is empty. The few
					hangers-on who are normally permitted into the parlor to enlarge
					“the opportunity of hectoring and condescension for their betters”
					are instead taking the better seats in the bar across the hall,
					to hector and condescend to their inferiors in turn.

The conversation in the tavern is quite animated by the
					time Silas arrives, though it has taken a while to get up to speed.
					The narrator describes this conversation in considerable detail.
					It begins with an aimless argument about a cow, followed by a story
					from Mr. Macey about a time when he heard the parson bungle the
					words of a wedding vow, a story that everyone in the tavern has
					heard many times before. Macey says that the parson’s lapse set
					him thinking about whether the wedding was therefore invalid and,
					if not, just what it was that gave weddings meaning in the first
					place. Just before Silas appears, the conversation lapses back into
					an argument, this time about the existence of a ghost who allegedly
					haunts a local stable. The argumentative farrier, Mr. Dowlas, does
					not believe in the ghost, and offers to stand out in front of the
					stable all night, betting that he will not see the ghost. He gets
					no takers, as the Rainbow’s landlord, Mr. Snell, argues that some
					people are just unable to see ghosts.

The theft of Silas’s gold forces him to involve himself
					in the life of the town. This is the second theft we have encountered
					so far in the novel. The original theft, which drove Silas out of
					Lantern Yard, made him an outcast from his tight-knit community
					and deprived him of any faith except in money. The second theft,
					Dunsey’s, eventually reverses both of these effects. Eliot writes
					that Silas’s gold had “gathered his power of loving together into
					a hard isolation like its own.” Its loss makes Silas venture out
					into the community to ask for help.

	The conversation Silas interrupts in the tavern provides
					Eliot with an opportunity to show a slice of life of the Raveloe
					community. Almost all of the action thus far in the novel has taken
					place in the private sphere, within characters’ homes. The tavern
					provides a public counterpart. The Rainbow is the primary meeting
					place for Raveloe’s men, where members of all of the town’s social
					classes meet and mingle. Unlike church, the other significant public
					space in the town, the tavern is a participatory atmosphere. Everyone
					is invited to chime in to the arguments and stories. There is, however, a
					strict hierarchy that is encoded in the interactions we see at the Rainbow.
					The higher-class patrons order spirits-and-water to drink, the lower-class
					patrons beer. The higher-class patrons sit near the fire, the lower-class
					farther away. Even the two rooms of the inn itself are arranged
					to separate social classes.

	The evening’s conversation provides examples of the often
					superstitious beliefs that bind its participants together. In describing
					the conversation in such painstaking detail, Eliot furnishes not
					only a vivid rendering of the dialect of the lower class, but also
					a portrait of their beliefs. The topics of conversation are trivial
					and the participants are made to seem slightly ridiculous. However,
					they do occasionally touch on important ideas. Mr. Macey’s story
					concerns the importance of language, and Mr. Snell’s point about
					some people’s inability to see ghosts touches on the subjectivity
					of experience. In simultaneously making light of the denizens of
					the Rainbow and showing that they possess a certain unschooled curiosity,
					Eliot tempers her authorial condescension and shows her subjects
					as limited in certain ways, but nevertheless complex and worthy
					of attention.

	The conversation, however, is a ritual to stave off boredom
					as much as it is a forum for exchanging beliefs. Like Silas’s weaving and
					the Cass family’s hunting and riding, these nightly gatherings at the
					Rainbow are repetitive. Mr. Macey has told the same story to the same
					audience many times before. Though this boredom and ritual seem
					meaningless, they are an integral part of the rural life Eliot presents.
					These gatherings form the texture of their participants’ daily life,
					a life that is punctuated only occasionally by noteworthy events.

