Distinguished by his striking good looks and affable nature,
				Billy’s primary quality is his extraordinary, even disturbing innocence.
				At twenty-one years of age, he has never directly confronted evil.
				Due to his good looks, he has always been well liked and admired
				wherever he goes. As a result, he naïvely takes the view that other
				people always mean him the best. He has not developed the prudent
				cynicism of a figure like the Dansker, who is well aware of man’s
				evil inclinations. He has no defense against a hateful man such
				as Claggart, and cannot even perceive the malice in Claggart’s sarcastic comment
				about Billy’s accident with the soup. If Billy had believed it when
				the Dansker told him that Claggart was plotting against Billy, he
				might have been able to protect himself. But Billy is blinded by
				his own openhearted nature, and he misjudges the malevolent Claggart as
				a friend.

	Billy’s demise is brought about by a combination of his
				own weaknesses and evil influences that are outside of him and beyond his
				comprehension. Along with his naïve trust in others, his weaknesses
				include his speech impediment, which renders him unable to defend
				himself when Claggart accuses him of mutiny. Melville presents this
				speech impediment as more than a physical condition, however—Billy’s
				hesitancy and speechlessness seem directly related to his ignorance
				and innocence. He has no words with which to confront Claggart because
				he cannot understand Claggart’s evil or formulate any clear thoughts
				about him. Faced with Claggart’s lie, he can think of no way to
				rebut him other than with brute force. Similarly, Billy is unable
				to identify and condemn the conspirators on the ship adequately
				so as to nip the situation before it buds. Essentially, Billy’s
				mental and emotional shortcomings render him extremely vulnerable
				to the evil influences on board the ship, although the evil itself
				lies in other people.

	Melville portrays Billy’s innocence as something to be
				both admired and pitied.  In a number of ways, Billy’s fate parallels
				that of Jesus Christ, suggesting that the sacrifice of Billy’s innocence
				represents both a significant loss for the world and a hope for
				mankind’s redemption. It would be a mistake, however, to view Billy simply
				as a Christ figure. Billy is a flawed human being, even violent at
				times. Unlike Christ, Billy does not willingly or even wittingly
				sacrifice himself for the sake of others. Whereas Christ, in his
				death, intentionally takes all of the sins of the world upon himself
				to save humankind from evil, Billy dies because he cannot comprehend
				evil or defend himself adequately against it. In this sense, Billy
				is more human than Christ—what happens to Billy more closely resembles something
				that could happen to us, and we are perhaps able to pity him and
				empathize with him more deeply.

