Alex is the narrator and protagonist of A Clockwork
					Orange. Every word on the page is his, and we experience
				his world through the sensations he describes and the suffering
				he endures. He is at once generic and highly individual, mindless
				and substantive, knowingly evil and innocently likeable. 

At first, Alex appears to be little more than a robot
				programmed for violence. In the world of the novel, youth violence
				is a major social problem, and Alex represents a typical—though
				highly successful—teenager. He dresses in the “heighth of fashion,”
				frequents all of the popular hangouts, and is the undisputed leader
				of his gang. Like most teenagers in A Clockwork Orange,
				Alex speaks in a highly stylized slang called nadsat.
				Alex is unique in his unyielding commitment to the ideals of violence,
				as well as the aesthetic pleasure he takes in his crimes. Alex elevates
				his evil behavior to the status of art. Alex loves art itself, particularly
				classical music. A devout enthusiast of Beethoven, Mozart, and other
				composers, Alex experiences something akin to religious joy when
				he listens to classical music. To Alex, the delight he finds in
				classical music is closely related to the ecstasy he feels during
				acts of violence. When listening to one recording, for example,
				Alex imagines “carving the whole litso [face] of the creeching [screaming]
				world with [his] cut-throat britva [razor].” Throughout the novel,
				Alex further emphasizes the connection between music and violence
				by reserving his most musical language for the descriptions of his
				most brutal crimes.

Alex experiences the pleasures of music and brutality
				in a direct and sensuous manner, without mediation or meditation.
				Unlike F. Alexander, one of Alex’s primary antagonists, Alex remains
				completely uninterested in explaining his actions in terms of abstract
				or theoretical notions, and he rarely considers himself in a larger
				social context. When faced with various hypotheses as to the origin
				of his depravity, Alex’s responses are staunchly anti-intellectual.
				Unlike his probation officer, P.R. Deltoid, Alex believes that evil
				represents a natural state for human beings, and is as valid a state
				of being as goodness. According to this reasoning, Alex believes
				that the State, which seeks to deprive him of the choice to act
				cruelly, encroaches on his freedom as an individual. Thus, in choosing
				violence, Alex ultimately affirms his sense of self.

Alex’s vileness in A Clockwork Orange underlines
				the theme that human beings, no matter how depraved, shouldn’t be
				deprived of their freedom of self-determination. The State’s destruction
				of Alex’s ability to make his own moral choices represents a greater evil
				than any of Alex’s crimes, since turning Alex into an automaton ultimately
				sanctions the notion that human nature is dispensable. Alex truly
				grows as a human being only in the last chapter, after the government
				removes his conditioning and he can see the error of his ways for
				himself, without the prompting of an external, controlling force. 

