Grant takes Miss Emma to the jail in Bayonne.
					When they arrive, they meet two deputies, Clark and Paul. Clark
					orders Paul to search through the package Emma has brought for Jefferson.
					After a thorough inspection, they allow Emma and Grant into Jefferson’s
					cell. They find Jefferson lying flat on his bunk, staring at the
					ceiling. Jefferson does not respond to Emma’s questions. He refuses
					her food too, merely saying, “It don’t matter.” She asks him to
					clarify, and he tells her, “Nothing don’t matter.” In a vague manner,
					he asks when they are going to execute him. Emma does not understand
					his question, but Grant does. Emma continues to talk, but she cannot
					get him to say much else.

The next two visits follow a similar pattern. On the day
					of the fourth visit, Tante Lou tells Grant that Miss Emma is ill
					and cannot go to the prison today. Grant enters the house to find
					Miss Emma in her chair, coughing unconvincingly. Grant thinks she
					is feigning illness because she and his aunt expect him to go to
					the jail alone from now on. Grant is angry and tells them he feels
					humiliated performing the duties they ask of him. Through her tears,
					Miss Emma apologizes for humiliating him, but says she has no one
					else to whom she can turn for help. Grant departs.

When Grant gets to Jefferson’s cell, he is unsure of what
					to say. He asks Jefferson if he is hungry. Jefferson asks if Grant
					has brought any corn, saying that hogs eat corn. Grinning angrily,
					Jefferson acts like a hog, kneeling down and sticking his head in
					the bag of food Grant brought. Grant watches him carefully and asks
					if Jefferson is trying to make him feel guilty so that Grant will
					leave him alone. He says white men think Jefferson’s situation is
					hopeless. Jefferson does not respond. Grant wants to ask Jefferson
					what he is thinking about, but he stifles the impulse. 

Grant knows he will have to lie to protect
					Miss Emma from the news of Jefferson’s disturbing anger, but he
					cannot face her. He drives to the Rainbow Club. Sitting at the bar,
					he listens to some old men talking about Jackie Robinson and remembers
					the excitement and pride the town felt when the boxer Joe Louis achieved
					heroic success. He recalls a recurring dream he used to have in
					which a young man on his way to the electric chair cried out for
					Joe Louis to save him. He wonders if Jefferson would call out to
					Jackie Robinson for help.

	Grant quickly leaves the bar and walks to the school
					where -Vivian teaches the sixth and seventh grades. Grant finds
					Vivian working quietly at her desk. He asks her to leave town with
					him that night, but she reminds him that they should not be seen
					together. She does not want to give her husband any excuse to take
					her children. He tells her about his visit to Jefferson’s cell and,
					once again, he tells her he wants to leave the South forever. She
					says he cannot bring himself to leave because he loves his people
					more than he hates the South. Grant says that he wants more than
					he has. Before they leave to get a drink, Vivian tells him that
					most of the teachers and students at her school know about their
					love affair.

Grant and Jefferson view each other as foes. During Grant’s
					first solo visit to Jefferson’s cell, Jefferson shows that he took
					offense at his lawyer’s words, but in the absence of a true enemy
					to rage against, he takes out his anger on Grant. Jefferson makes
					it clear that being called a hog angers him more than the death
					sentence does. Sheriff Guidry says Jefferson can die like a “contented
					hog,” but Jefferson is not contented, animalistic, or stupid; he
					realizes that his lawyer’s words denied him his humanity, his will,
					and his spirit. Like Jefferson, Grant feels trapped and humiliated.
					He bemoans having to visit Jefferson, particularly if he has to
					go alone. Although Grant does not show the same amount of aggression
					that Jefferson does in the cell, Grant’s will to abandon Jefferson
					and the South can itself be seen as an aggressive affront. Grant’s
					inability to see the good that might come from his visits with Jefferson
					prevents him from interacting positively with Jefferson. Instead
					of calmly dealing with Jefferson’s outburst, Grant reacts in an
					accusatory and almost petty fashion, asking Jefferson if he is trying
					to make him feel guilty.

	Grant’s discussion of Joe Louis and Jackie Robinson suggests that
					because few black public figures and heroes existed in the 1940s,
					sports figures like Joe Louis and Jackie Robinson shouldered the
					burden of personifying black greatness in public. These giants take
					on almost godlike qualities in the public eye; Grant dreams that the
					men could rescue the downtrodden from death. In his dream, a young
					man calls for Joe Louis to save him as if asking Jesus Christ for
					salvation. In this novel, however, Gaines shows how Jefferson and
					Grant come to serve as heroes for each other. Each develops a strong
					sense of humanity and character by working with the person in front
					of him, not by searching for a god to save him. Gaines does not
					wish to diminish the accomplishments of heroes like Joe Louis or
					Jackie Robinson, nor does he aim to degrade people for looking up
					to these heroes. Rather, he tries to show how two ordinary black men
					living in the troubled South become heroic figures for each other
					and for others too.

	For Grant, Vivian and the Club both provide an escape
					and demand conscientiousness. While at the Club, Grant wonders whether
					Jefferson would ask for salvation from Jackie Robinson like the
					young man in his dream. In realizing that Jefferson would have to
					appeal to Jackie Robinson, Grant realizes that Jefferson lacks a
					positive role model, a hero, or a God who can actually save him.
					Vivian acts as Grant’s conscience, drawing attention to his tendency
					to deny reality. After Grant expresses a longing to leave the South,
					Vivian brings him back to earth, saying that both she and Grant
					must remain in the South. She says the South is all they have, implying
					that despite the difficulties they face, they have an obligation
					to the black quarter and its inhabitants—they cannot forsake their
					roots and community. Vivian knows why Grant never acts upon his
					urge to leave the South and spells it out for him, saying, “You
					love them more than you hate this place.” Grant says he wants more,
					which points both to his laudable desire to create a better life for
					himself and his bullheaded resistance to Vivian’s sensible observations.
					Although with his departure and return Grant has proven Vivian right
					in her idea that he loves his people more he hates the South, he
					remains convinced that by running away he and Vivian will solve
					all of their problems.

	Vivian is proud of her love for Grant, and, despite her
					will to remain in Bayonne to keep her children, she cannot hide
					this love. The fact that the whole school is suspicious of their
					relationship, and that Vivian proudly accepts and announces that
					they suspect it, indicates that she foresees their ultimate union
					with one another. Her comment here at the end of Chapter 12 shows
					that she enjoys the thought of living with Grant in the South. Gaines
					shows Vivian’s emotional state here in order to heighten the ensuing
					clash between her and Grant that occurs later in the novel.

