Prejean pleads with Millard Farmer to take Patrick’s case.
					He says he will. On December 14, 1983, just a month after the court
					denies Patrick’s appeal, Robert Wayne Williams, another inmate at Angola,
					is put to death. Robert Williams’s mother insisted on an open casket
					at the funeral so people could see the burn scars on her son’s body.

Millard Farmer prepares petitions for the U.S. Court of
					Appeals for the Fifth Circuit and the U.S. Supreme Court. On January
					18, he and Prejean visit Patrick. During the drive to the prison,
					Millard explains the flaws and inadequacies of Patrick’s initial
					defense. It is now very difficult to correct the mistakes made during
					the trial. He believes the Supreme Court’s decision to allow execution
					is a byproduct of a political compromise made after the federal
					government enforced Civil Rights Laws. The courts, he says, are
					now so interested in speeding up executions that they are violating
					people’s constitutional right to fair trials. Prejean offers two
					examples of the courts doing so.

Millard says he will argue that Patrick had ineffective
					counsel, although he doesn’t believe this will work. He says that
					ninety-nine percent of death row inmates are poor. He points out
					that Patrick’s lawyer failed to offer personal testimony on his
					client’s behalf during the sentencing. During law school, Millard
					witnessed case after case in which white juries sentenced black
					men to death, proof that white lives are clearly valued more highly
					than black ones. In 1987, the Supreme Court acknowledged a racial
					discrepancy in capital sentencing, but nonetheless excused it as
					“an inevitable part of our criminal justice system.” Millard offers
					further evidence that poverty and a poor defense largely determine
					sentencing in capital cases. In three different cases, the Supreme
					Court upheld the right of the state to execute the mentally retarded,
					sixteen-year-olds, and the formerly insane.

At the prison, Millard explains his defense strategy to
					Patrick. Patrick tells Millard he met his defense counsel for the
					first time the day before the trial. On the drive back, Millard
					tells Prejean his plan to appeal to Governor Edwin Edwards, who
					he believes is a reluctant supporter of the death penalty. Prejean
					asks Bishop Ott, the Catholic Bishop of Baton Rouge, and Reverend
					James Stovall, head of the Louisiana Interchurch Conference, to
					talk to the governor on Patrick’s behalf. They both agree. The Supreme
					Court denies Patrick’s petition. The execution is set for April
					5, 1984.

On March 17, Archbishop Phillip Hanna, a man who in the
					past advocated on behalf of the death penalty, agrees to intervene
					on Patrick’s behalf. Brad Fisher, a clinical psychologist, evaluates Patrick
					and concludes he is an extremely productive prisoner. Prejean grows
					increasingly hopeful.

On March 27, Prejean and seven others—including Bishop
					Ott, Reverend Stovall, Archbishop Hanna, and Brad Fisher—meet with Governor
					Edwards, who is surrounded by cameras and reporters, and argue on
					behalf of Patrick. The governor says it is his job to carry out
					the laws of the state. His position gives him a moral loophole that
					allows him to sleep peacefully at night, despite his reluctance
					to enforce the death penalty. Prejean quotes a political writer who
					refers to the governor’s power to pardon as the last “vestige of the
					power of kings.”

In preparation for the Pardon Board hearing and appeals,
					Prejean reads the trial transcripts. In addition to the horrors
					of the crime, she finds several omissions and discrepancies. On
					March 30, they file a petition with the Pardon Board. They meet
					with Howard Marsellus, chairperson of the board. He is sympathetic
					and agrees that the death penalty is a poor man’s punishment. In
					the future, Prejean says, Marsellus will serve time in jail for
					fixing pardons and taking bribes.

The next day, both sides present their cases before the
					Pardon Board. While waiting for the board’s decision, Prejean meets
					Lloyd LeBlanc, David’s father, who reproaches her for not reaching
					out to the victim’s family. They talk for an hour, and Lloyd describes
					his vision of Patrick as a rapist and murderer. The board votes
					four to one in favor of execution. Later that night, Prejean asks
					her friend, Sister Kathleen Lory, to help her prepare for Patrick’s
					funeral.

Prejean dedicates much of Chapter 3 to the history of
					capital punishment in America. In the retelling, her long car ride
					with Millard Farmer becomes a concise summary of the legal battles
					surrounding capital punishment. What emerges from Prejean’s account
					is a portrait of a legal system that cares more for procedural rules
					than for protecting the life and rights of the individual. The law
					takes center stage as Prejean’s narrative shifts from the specifics
					of Patrick’s case to a larger indictment of the death penalty. In
					example after example, Prejean shows not only the arbitrary nature
					of capital punishment but also the gradual shift in the courts toward
					giving states the right to execute their citizens. A system of punishment
					that the Supreme Court once deemed arbitrary has been extended to
					teenagers, the mentally retarded, and the formerly insane.

Prejean’s narrative addresses broad questions of social
					justice. She presents Patrick’s execution not as an isolated event,
					but as one symptom of a societal illness. She wants her readers
					to have a proper understanding of the history of capital punishment,
					and to see the startling importance of race and poverty in determining
					punishment. The Supreme Court may have accepted that such biases
					are an inevitable part of our judicial system, but for Prejean and
					Millard Farmer, passively accepting unfair treatment is unacceptable.
					In light of the courts’ historical treatment of capital punishment
					cases, Patrick’s case becomes an aperture through which the failures
					of our legal system are clearly seen. The glaring inadequacy of
					Patrick’s initial defense and Millard Farmer’s inability to do anything
					to repair the damage show the disturbing degree to which procedure
					is more important than a person’s life. But Prejean never loses
					sight of the fact that behind the technical legal details lies a
					man’s life.

Behind the death penalty are the men and women responsible
					for its enforcement. Capital punishment is not an abstract force
					or system, but one that depends upon the actions of a handful of
					individuals. Prejean’s narrative shows the great power of the few
					men and women entrusted to decide who should live and die. That
					such power should lie in the hands of any one individual strikes
					Prejean as absurd.

Prejean and her dedicated friends continue to act and
					argue on behalf of Patrick’s life. Once again, Camus’ philosophy
					is relevant. As an existentialist philosopher, Camus argued on behalf
					of individual action even in the face of the world’s overwhelming
					absurdity. Prejean is aware of how illogical it is to argue with
					the state about sparing a man’s life, yet that is precisely what
					she does.

Prejean’s conversation with Lloyd LeBlanc, touched on
					briefly earlier in the narrative, helps complete the portrait not
					only of Patrick, but of the suffering his crime has caused. For
					Prejean to live up to her ideals and values, she must fully consider
					the perspective of the victims’ families. Lloyd LeBlanc thinks of
					Patrick as a man who spent his time hunting for women and teenagers.
					His perspective is not only understandable, but also partially accurate.
					This is the other side of Patrick and the justification for the
					death penalty. His crime has shattered the lives of two families.
					For these families, the execution of Patrick is not a violation
					of his rights, but an act of justice.

