As Clarissa returns home with the flowers, she bumps into
					Sally in the hallway. Sally tells Clarissa that she is going to
					lunch with Oliver St. Ives. In the hallway, Clarissa feels sad,
					and wonders about her quick switch from joy to sadness. She thinks
					about Richard and how he is disappearing into insanity. When she
					enters the house, she thinks about the party and feels better. The
					kitchen brings a feeling of sudden dislocation, and she feels as
					if she doesn’t belong there. All of a sudden, she considers breaking
					up with Sally and moving out so that she can feel happy. The feeling
					passes quickly and she feels in place again. While listening to
					the messages on the answering machine, Clarissa feels badly that
					Oliver didn’t invite her to lunch. The feeling of being passed over
					feels a little bit like death, and Clarissa thinks that the world
					has started to ignore her. As she puts the roses into water, she
					thinks that she needs to just be happy being alive.

Clarissa remembers the summer that she and Richard were
					lovers. Their romance would not have been possible had they not moved
					into Louis’s aunt and uncle’s house at Wellfleet for the summer.
					She wonders if she should have stayed with Richard and discovered
					another future for herself. Though happy with her life, she has
					a special affection for Richard as the person she loved when she was
					young and her future was full of possibility. She thinks of the moment
					that she kissed Richard by the pond and realizes it was not a promise
					of something more to come, but a moment that mattered in itself.

Laura and Richie’s birthday cake for Dan does not turn
					out as well as Laura at hoped. Rather than an exquisite work of
					art, the cake looks like any other homemade cake. Laura thinks about
					the presents she has to wrap for Dan and how happy he will be as
					he opens each one. She admires him for his ability to enjoy simple
					pleasures and wishes that she could just want to be loved by Dan
					the way he wants to love her. As she considers this, she realizes
					that she would not want to be crazy like Virginia Woolf.

The Brown’s next-door neighbor Kitty stops by to say hello. Because
					Kitty was prettier and more popular in high school, Laura feels
					threatened by her. As she sits down in the kitchen, Kitty comments
					that Laura’s cake is “cute,” which upsets Laura. Laura thinks Kitty
					has befriended her because she is married to a man as attractive
					and respected as Dan. Despite the fact that Kitty has the magnetism
					of a movie star, her husband is perceived as a disappointment and
					the couple have not yet been able to conceive a child.

While Laura and Kitty sit and chat about coffee brands,
					Laura longs to open up to Kitty and find out if she feels the same
					feelings of confusion and alienation about the domestic life of
					a housewife. The conversation turns to Kitty’s health, and Kitty
					mentions that she’ll need Laura to stop by and keep an eye on their
					dog for a couple of days. Kitty has to enter the hospital to get
					tests performed on a growth on her uterus. Stunned by this news,
					Laura feels as if Kitty’s life has been invaded by misfortune. She
					reaches to Kitty and holds her like a child, gently kissing the
					top of her head. In the moment of contact, Laura thinks she can
					look into Kitty’s soul. The two women momentarily kiss on the lips.
					Laura pulls back, feeling suddenly strange and predatory. She promises
					to feed the dog and to call Kitty at the hospital. As Kitty leaves,
					Laura thinks about how she wants to go back to bed. She looks at
					her cake and dumps it in the garbage can, resolving to make a better
					one. 

Clarissa tries to make peace with the decisions she has
					made in life, although she cannot help but wonder what might have
					happened if she had made other choices. In her idle moments, she
					returns to the question of whether she would have been happier with
					Richard and whether she made the right decision by choosing a domestic
					life with Sally. Clarissa’s epiphany about the kiss by the pond
					is simultaneously hopeful and depressing. She attempts to leave
					her other possible futures behind and feel happy about all that
					she has. In spite of this, she realizes that her kiss with Richard
					by the pond may have been the pinnacle of all her moments—and an
					experience that she will never recapture. Even though she can take
					comfort that she has been lucky enough to have the experience at
					all, she has trouble reconciling the idea that she might have had
					more moments like that had she made different choices.

Clarissa feels most at home in a domestic setting, so
					her experience of dislocation in her own apartment is particularly
					jarring. She enjoys taking care of small details and derives great
					pleasure from the accomplishments of her morning errands, but she
					feels disconnected from her surroundings upon reentering her apartment.
					As she looks as the plates in the cupboard, she wonders if she actually bought
					those plates and put them there. Clarissa feels confused about the
					choices she has made. The presence of domestic symbols that remind
					her of those choices feels strange and unsettling. To Clarissa,
					these choices seem to have been made by someone that she doesn’t
					understand and cannot identify with. Laura desires a moment of connection
					and communication with Kitty, and she reaches over to kiss her when
					she becomes weary of idle small talk. Both Laura and Kitty are blocked
					off from their emotions and have trouble speaking frankly with each
					other about their personal struggles. Laura envies Kitty for her
					dynamism and magnetism, while Kitty envies Laura for having a wonderful
					husband and a child. Their connection is tenuous because they cannot
					get past redundant conversation to discuss the painful experiences
					with which they are struggling. Impetuously, Laura reaches over
					and kisses Kitty sensually on the lips. The moment does not feel
					sexual, but rather it is borne out of Laura’s desperation to feel
					a moment of deep connection to another human being. Laura feels
					stifled by her relationship with her husband and thinks that she
					may find intimacy and empathy with Kitty. 

The imperfect cake epitomizes Laura’s frustrations with
					her own imperfect life. She wanted to create a perfect cake that
					would seem like a work of art, but it fails to meet her expectations.
					Her frustration with the cake mirrors her frustrations with her
					domestic existence. Laura’s frustration deepens when Kitty seems
					to dismiss her cake as being merely “cute.” She blames herself for
					the failure and impulsively throws the cake in the trash. She fears
					that these impulses will make her feel as crazy as Virginia Woolf.
					By throwing away her imperfect cake, she feels liberated from her
					failures. Ultimately she will decide to leave her family as a way
					of escaping the mundane life that drags her down. 

