“What you do speaks so loudly that I
						cannot hear what you say.”

Tibby stops eating and watches TV in her room, ignoring
					the ringing phone. Mrs. Graffman leaves a message, asking Tibby
					to visit Bailey. Tibby can barely handle the pain she feels, and
					she wishes she could somehow go to sleep in Mimi’s box.

Carmen calls Albert. She’s tempted to apologize, because
					she knows Albert will instantly forgive her and they can close this
					episode forever. Instead, she tells him how disappointed she is
					in how the summer turned out, and how uncomfortable she feels around
					his new family. Sobbing, she asks him why he left her and Christina, and
					why he hardly ever visits her. Albert, crying too, apologizes. This
					is the first time Carmen has heard him cry.

Carmen visits Tibby, but Tibby doesn’t feel like talking.
					The phone rings, and Mrs. Graffman leaves a message saying that
					Bailey isn’t well and that they’d like Tibby to visit. Carmen leaves,
					but she comes back shortly thereafter. She tells Tibby to visit
					Bailey, gives her the Pants, and then leaves. Late that night, Tibby
					is suddenly afraid she’s too late. She rides her bike to the hospital,
					fast. Tibby finds Bailey’s room, where she sees that Bailey has
					a lot of tubes connected to her. Bailey is asleep, but Tibby squeezes
					onto the bed with her and holds her hand.

Lena’s family and the rest of the town celebrate an important
					holiday, the Assumption of the Virgin. After eating and drinking
					with all the revelers, Lena retreats to her room, watching the party
					from her window. She sees Effie dance with Andreas. She sees Kostos dance
					with her grandmother and the other old women, even though lots of
					young girls are watching him eagerly. Lena cries, but she doesn’t
					really know why. Later, she looks at the moon from her window, and
					she sees her grandfather in his window too. She knows she’s a lot
					like her grandfather, but she hopes she can open herself up enough
					to find love, like he did.

“All Moanday. Tearday. Wailsday. Thumpsday. Frightday.
						Shatterday.”

When Effie comes into Lena’s room to borrow clothes, she
					sees the picture that Lena made of Kostos. She claims that now she
					knows Lena is in love with Kostos and tells Lena she has to do something
					or she’ll always be sorry.

Tibby wakes up in the hospital with Bailey. She tells
					Bailey that Mimi died. Bailey tells Tibby to go to work, because
					Duncan needs her there, but to come back later. Carmen is waiting
					for Tibby in the hallway, and they trade pants before leaving the
					hospital.

On August 19, Carmen, wearing the
					Pants, goes to the airport and buys a ticket to South Carolina.
					On the plane, this time she eats the apple from the snack basket
					instead of saving it. Once she arrives, she goes to a church, right
					before her father’s wedding begins. She sees a few familiar faces,
					then she sees her father in his tuxedo, along with his best man,
					Paul. Krista comes down the aisle, then Lydia. Watching everyone
					at the altar, Carmen feels sad, knowing she should be with them.
					Her father sees her on his way out.

All of Bridget’s friends worry about Bridget, who remains
					listless. Eric asks her to walk with him. On the beach, Eric tells
					her he knows now how hurt she is by what happened. He says he hadn’t
					realized how inexperienced she was because she acted so much older.
					Then he tells her how crazy he is about her but also explains that
					it’s not the right time. He hopes they meet again when she’s older,
					he says, because then he can allow himself to really love her. Bridget
					knows he’s trying to comfort her, but his words have no effect.

Throughout the summer, the Pants have made all the girls
					feel good about themselves, but now the Pants truly help Tibby and
					Carmen find courage to do necessary things. Tibby, in denial about
					Bailey’s sickness, has refused to call or visit Bailey in the hospital,
					and she even screens Bailey’s calls, letting the answering machine
					pick up. However, when Carmen gives her the Pants, Tibby finally
					understands how important it is for her to visit to Bailey, and
					the Pants help her find the courage to get on her bike and go. The
					Pants also help Carmen do something very brave: face her father
					and his new family by attending Albert’s wedding. Until now, Carmen
					has dealt with her anger at her father indirectly, by trying to
					be perfect for him and by trying to keep their relationship on an
					even keel. She threw the rock through the window as an act of desperation,
					but running away kept the action from helping her communicate with
					her father more honestly. Now, though, she’s found the courage to
					speak openly with him on the phone, and the Pants are with her when
					she flies to South Carolina to attend his wedding. Like Tibby, unable
					to face a future she doesn’t like the looks of, Carmen has refused
					to face a future that involves accepting her father’s new life.
					The Pants give both girls the courage to take necessary steps forward,
					even when what they’re moving toward seems difficult, and the Pants also
					let the girls feel good about the steps they’ve taken to mend and fix
					trouble spots in their lives.

Although Effie is younger than Lena, Lena relies on her
					for frank advice and insight. Effie, the more outgoing and open
					of the sisters, spends her life engaging with the world rather than
					brooding about it. Her willingness to put herself out there and
					really live her life sets her apart from Lena, who prefers to live
					in her own world, apart from others, while constantly wishing she
					had the courage to let others into her life. When it comes to love,
					Effie is the wiser of the two as well. She’s only fourteen, so she
					doesn’t take love or boys very seriously, but she understands how
					important love is and can recognize it in Lena. She says what Lena
					can’t bring herself to admit: that the right thing to do is confess
					her feelings to Kostos, even though it’s hard to do. Only when Lena
					hears the words from her sister can she acknowledge their truth.
					Effie teaches Lena how to avoid regret.

Unlike a lot of novels for young adults, The Sisterhood
						of the Traveling Pants deals with heady, difficult subjects.
					Bridget especially must confront confusing, adult situations when
					she has a sexual encounter with Eric. She does not know how to feel,
					how to act, or what to say, but she understands that their relationship
					has changed her profoundly. Her weight loss symbolizes on the outside how
					much she has changed on the inside. She goes from being lighthearted
					and competitive to unsure, angry, and restless. Her explosion at
					Molly the coach indicates her immaturity and demonstrates just how
					unprepared Bridget was for the aftermath of her interaction with
					Eric. Even Eric assumed that Bridget could handle the consequences
					of her actions. As Eric speaks with her on the beach, Bridget does
					not feel comforted by his words. Rather, she retreats further inward,
					shielding herself from the painful world around her. Of all the
					girls, Bridget changes the most physically and emotionally, perhaps
					because her changes are the most severe and intense. Bridget’s experience
					is something of a lesson in patience and of caution about rushing
					headlong and thoughtlessly into new situations.

