“Yess, wretched we are, precious. . .
						. Misery misery! Hobbits won’t kill us, nice hobbits.”	

The narrative returns to Frodo and Sam on the third day
					after they departed from their companions at the end of The
						Fellowship of the Ring. The hobbits wander the barren slopes
					of the mountains called Emyn Muir, striving to make their way to
					Mordor, but frequently getting lost and having to retrace their
					steps. Standing on the edge of a tall cliff, they can see the way
					down into Mordor, but have no way to descend the cliff. Sam complains
					to Frodo about their desperate situation. He has been lugging cooking
					gear for days, but there is nothing to cook. The hobbits survive
					only on old lembas cakes, and Sam yearns for a
					pint of beer and a chunk of bread. He expresses his hope that they
					have lost Gollum, the creature who has been pursuing them for some
					time. Frodo agrees, but says that he is more troubled by the unending
					hills of the landscape, which torture his feet. He observes that
					there is no turning back, as Orc warriors now patrol the banks of
					the river they have crossed.

Sam and Frodo continue to follow the cliff northward for
					several more days, finally arriving at a spot where it appears they
					might be able to climb down. Sam insists on going first, against
					Frodo’s objections. Sam lowers himself down the cliff, when suddenly
					a great dark shape appears overhead with a horrible wind and a crack
					of thunder. Sam loses his hold on the rock and falls, but is saved
					by a narrow ledge below. Frodo tries to hide his face in fear, but
					he loses his foothold and falls down onto a ledge below. It begins
					to rain. Sam suddenly remembers that he has a strong, thin Elf rope
					in his bag. He measures it out, and finds that it is long enough
					to allow the two hobbits to lower themselves to the ground below.

After descending safely, Sam and Frodo prepare to go onward
					to Mordor. Sam regrets abandoning the rope, which is still attached
					to a rock overhead and cannot be untied. Suddenly, as if by magic,
					the rope is released and falls into his hands. Frodo suspects that
					the knot was not tied well, but both wonder whether it was perhaps
					enchantment that freed the rope.

As the hobbits huddle in the cold, Frodo spots a crawling
					insect-like creature on a distant cliff, clinging to the wall by
					its hands. Sam realizes the creature is Gollum. As the creature
					draws nearer, he leaps on Sam. They wrestle. Frodo draws his knife
					Sting from its sheath and thrusts it against Gollum’s neck, demanding
					obedience from the creature. Gollum is suddenly subservient and
					vows total servitude, but Frodo does not trust him entirely. Gollum
					suddenly bounds away, attempting escape. The hobbits get him back
					and harness him with the Elf rope, which causes Gollum great pain.
					Gollum again vows obedience, and this time he seems sincere. The
					creature leads his Hobbit masters onward to Mordor.

A sense of frustration and hopelessness colors our first
					glimpse of Frodo and Sam in The Two Towers, much
					like our first glimpse of Merry and Pippin in Book III. As we have
					seen frequently, the hobbits are not epic heroes who have great
					powers at their disposal to solve their dilemmas. Rather, they are
					shrewd and adaptable, using modest means and a bit of luck to yield
					impressive results. Indeed, in virtually all of the hobbits’ dilemmas
					in The Two Towers, the hobbits depend on something
					stronger than themselves to extricate them from their problems.
					Pippin profits from the fortunate fall of an Orc knife near his
					hand bindings in Book III, much as Frodo and Sam profit from the
					magic rope woven by Elves to lower themselves down the cliff in
					Book IV.

This chapter returns us to the fascinating character of
					Gollum, whom we have not seen up close since Bilbo’s encounter with
					the creature in The Hobbit. Gollum proves to be
					one of the most complex and indefinable characters in Tolkien’s
					novel. He is literally a slave to the Ring, as his mind focuses
					on his “Precious” at the exclusion of all else. Gollum’s moral nature
					is split quite drastically, an inward reflection of the division
					between Sméagol, his identity before he encountered the Ring, and
					Gollum, the creature he has since become. Gollum’s long-standing
					habit of talking aloud to himself, debating with himself in a near-neurotic
					manner, indicates his inner conflict and his lack of a strong sense
					of identity. When Gollum is subservient after Frodo tames him, he
					is genuinely convincing in his proclamation that he wishes to guide
					his new masters. Indeed, as we see many times in the upcoming chapters,
					Gollum stays with Frodo on many occasions when he could easily escape.
					Nonetheless, Gollum also proves himself treacherous on numerous
					occasions. Even at the very end of the novel, we are still somewhat
					divided between a view of Gollum as an innocent but selfish child
					and a view of him as a depraved and evil monster.

Frodo’s taming of Gollum highlights a potential for sternness and
					authority in the hobbit that we have not yet seen, as he uses the knife
					in a fearless and even somewhat violent manner. As we continue to
					see in the following chapters, Frodo displays a surprising and forceful
					mix of suspicion and compassion in his interactions with Gollum,
					fully aware of the creature’s motivation to retrieve the Ring, but
					sensing that he would not do anything to harm the hobbits overtly.
					This aura of suspicion and mistrust parallels, on a small scale,
					the overall atmosphere of apprehension that Sauron’s evil has cast
					over the whole of Middle-earth. In the character of Gollum, Tolkien
					injects a significant element of uncertainty into the plot, as even
					Gollum himself appears unsure of what he will do or what his goal
					is. This sense of utter unpredictability and potential danger pushes
					the narrative forward, keeping us in suspense throughout the entire
					remainder of The Two Towers as Gollum travels with
					the hobbits. Tolkien’s technique effectively places us in Frodo’s
					and Sam’s shoes: much like the hobbits, though we are aware that
					the wretched Gollum has selfish intentions, we have no idea when
					or how he might act upon them.

