Odysseus has the defining character traits of a Homeric
leader: strength, courage, nobility, a thirst for glory, and confidence
in his authority. His most distinguishing trait, however, is his
sharp intellect. Odysseus’s quick thinking helps him out of some
very tough situations, as when he escapes from the cave of the Cyclops
in Book 9, or when he hides his slaughter
of the suitors by having his minstrel strike up a wedding tune in
Book 23. He is also a convincing, articulate
speaker and can win over or manipulate his audience with ease. When
he first addresses Nausicaa on the island of Scheria, for example,
his suave, comforting approach quickly wins her trust.

Like other Homeric heroes, Odysseus longs to win kleos (“glory”
won through great deeds), but he also wishes to complete his nostos (“homecoming”).
He enjoys his luxurious life with Calypso in an exotic land, but
only to a point. Eventually, he wants to return home, even though
he admits that his wife cannot compare with Calypso. He thinks of
home throughout the time he spends with the Phaeacians and also
while on Circe’s island. Sometimes his glory-seeking gets in the
way of his home-seeking, however. He sacks the land of the Cicones
but loses men and time in the process. He waits too long in the
cave of Polyphemus, enjoying the free milk and cheese he finds,
and is trapped there when the Cyclops returns.

Homeric characters are generally static. Though they may
be very complex and realistic, they do not change over the course
of the work as characters in modern novels and stories do. Odysseus
and especially Telemachus break this rule. Early in his adventures, Odysseus’s
love of glory prompts him to reveal his identity to the Cyclops
and bring Poseidon’s wrath down on him. By the end of the epic,
he seems much more willing to temper pride with patience. Disguised
as a beggar, he does not immediately react to the abuse he receives
from the suitors. Instead, he endures it until the traps he has set
and the loyalties he has secured put him in a position from which he
can strike back effectively.

Take the Analysis of Major Characters Quick Quiz

