Ron and Lavender have broken up, as have Ginny and Dean.
					Harry is ecstatic. Katie Bell recovers and returns to school. Tensions
					run high for the Gryffindor vs. Ravenclaw game. A few days before
					the match, Harry checks the Marauder’s Map and sees Draco in the boys’
					bathroom with Moaning Myrtle. Harry rushes to the bathroom where
					Draco is crying at the sink, sobbing that unless he does something
					soon, he will be killed. Draco spots Harry and pulls out his wand.
					Harry yells “Sectumsempra,” the hex scribbled in
					the margins of the Half-Blood Prince’s book. Blood spurts from Draco’s face
					and chest, and Myrtle beings screaming. Snape bursts into the room
					and heals Draco’s wounds almost immediately. Snape hurries Draco
					to the hospital wing, commanding Harry to wait behind. When Snape
					returns, he asks Harry where he learned the spell, and demands that
					Harry bring him his Potions textbook. Harry leaves and runs into
					Ron, who lends Harry his Potions textbook. Harry sprints to the
					seventh floor and opens the Room of Requirement. Harry sees the
					broken Vanishing Cabinet Montague used last year. Harry hides the
					Half-Blood Prince’s book and runs back to the bathroom.

Snape is skeptical of Ron’s book and gives Harry detention
					every Saturday until the end of the term, which means Harry will
					have to miss Saturday’s Quidditch match. Harry’s teammates are devastated.
					That Saturday, when Harry is finally dismissed from detention, the
					Quidditch match is already over. Harry returns to the Gryffindor
					common room and is greeted with a huge celebration. Gryffindor won
					the match and the championship. Ginny runs toward Harry and throws
					her arms around him. Without thinking about it, Harry kisses her.
					Students immediately begin gossiping about Harry and Ginny. Ron
					chides the new couple but lets them know he has no objection. At
					lunch, Hermione shows Harry a newspaper article about Eileen Prince,
					and suggests that she may be the Half-Blood Prince. Harry receives
					a scroll asking him to report to Dumbledore’s office as quickly
					as possible.

On his way, Harry runs into a distressed Professor Trelawney. Harry
					asks her what happened, and she tells him that she was trying to
					get into the Room of Requirement to hide her sherry bottles, but when
					she went in, someone was there, whooping with excitement. She was
					hurled out of the room almost immediately. Harry tells Trelawney
					that she should tell Dumbledore what happened, and they head off
					together. Professor Trelawney tells Harry about her first interview
					with Dumbledore before she was hired. She was staying at the Hog’s
					Head, and Dumbledore came to see her in her room. Harry knows that
					this was when she made the prophecy about Harry and Voldemort, but
					Trelawney only remembers feeling funny. She and Dumbledore were
					interrupted by Snape, who was caught eavesdropping by a barman.
					Harry realizes that it was Snape who told Voldemort about Trelawney’s
					prophecy, thus sending Voldemort after Harry and his mother and
					father. Harry leaves Trelawney in the hallway and races toward Dumbledore’s
					office. Before Harry can confront Dumbledore, Dumbledore tells him
					that he has found a Horcrux and that Harry will be accompanying
					him to destroy it. Dumbledore tells him that the Horcrux is hidden
					in a cave on the coast, the same cave in which Voldemort once terrorized two
					children from his orphanage.

Harry tells Dumbledore that he knows that it was Snape
					who carried word of the prophecy. Dumbledore defends Snape, saying that
					he was still under Voldemort’s control and had no way of knowing
					that Voldemort would kill Harry’s parents. Harry is still outraged
					and implores Dumbledore to tell him why he trusts Snape. Dumbledore
					simply does. Harry tells Dumbledore about Draco’s whooping in the
					Room of Requirement. Dumbledore is once again unconcerned, assuring
					Harry that Hogwarts will be protected in their absence. Before they
					leave for the Horcrux, Dumbledore tells Harry that he must follow
					all orders Dumbledore gives him. Harry leaves to fetch his Invisibility
					Cloak and finds Ron and Hermione in the common room. He gives them
					the Marauder’s Map and the bottle of Felix Felicis and tells them
					to watch Snape and Draco Malfoy and to use special Galleons to contact
					any members of the D.A. (Dumbledore’s Army, the secret study group
					formed by Harry and his friends in the previous book to study Defense
					Against the Dark Arts) who may be able to help. Harry and Dumbledore
					walk to Hogsmeade together and Apparate to the shore.

Harry and Ginny’s kiss seems to happen totally naturally,
					without nervous prodding from either end. Even though Harry spends
					a great deal of time worrying about how his best friend will react
					to Harry kissing his sister, it turns out that Ron is actually just
					happy to see Harry content and relaxed and prefers his best friend
					to the other boys Ginny has dated. Ron jokes about giving Ginny
					and Harry his permission, but he is clearly not bothered by their
					sudden, unannounced coupling. The school gossips relentlessly about
					Ginny and Harry’s relationship, but Harry is simply glad that he’s
					getting attention for a perfectly normal event rather than for facing
					off with Voldemort. Rowling often contrasts the two major facets
					of Harry’s young life. On one hand, he is an average schoolboy,
					kissing girls and trying to pass his examinations, playing Quidditch
					and getting detention, just like every other student. Other times,
					however, Harry is preparing to chase down Horcruxes and arguing
					with the headmaster about the relative worth of another professor.

Although Harry has had considerable luck with the Half-Blood Prince’s
					Potions textbook in the past, the Sectumsempra spell
					proves to be a bit more than he can handle. Despite his intense
					dislike of Draco, Harry did not intend to attack Draco as violently
					as he did, and his own shock and fear at his act is indicative of
					Harry’s good heart. The fact that Draco was sobbing at the sink
					is also a surprising twist, as it portrays Draco as oddly sympathetic.
					Clearly, the stress of his predicament is taking its toll, and whatever
					Draco is up to, he is doing it under the threat of his own death.
					Rowling once again manages to make an unsympathetic character vaguely
					sympathetic. Just as we feel sorry for Voldemort that he had to
					endure such a painful childhood, we suddenly see that Draco Malfoy
					is actually under enormous pressure and is in a good deal of emotional
					pain. For Rowling, characters are rarely black and white. Draco
					is not a pleasant young man, but he is not emotionless, either.

Despite Harry’s ever-growing distrust of Snape, which
					is only accentuated by his discovery that it was Snape who leaked
					the prophecy to Voldemort, Dumbledore still continues to believe
					that Snape is loyal to the Order. Harry simply cannot understand
					how Dumbledore can completely ignore all the evidence that points
					to Snape’s inherent evilness. It hurts Harry to think that Dumbledore
					is being taken advantage of by Snape, and he begins to wonder if Dumbledore
					is growing too old and too out of touch to truly protect Hogwarts
					and help Harry stop Voldemort. Harry’s skepticism is natural, but
					Dumbledore has certainly earned Harry’s trust, and Harry can do
					nothing but accept that Dumbledore has good reason to believe that
					Snape is not betraying the Order. All of this does little to calm
					Harry’s nerves, however. Like his father and godfather, Harry believes
					that Snape is entirely untrustworthy. Once again, Dumbledore promises
					Harry that Hogwarts will be protected in their absence and seems
					strangely unconcerned that Draco was caught whooping with excitement
					in the Room of Requirement. Clearly, Dumbledore knows more about
					what goes on at his school than he lets on.

Throughout the series, Rowling has never given us reason
					to think that Dumbledore is anything other than a wise and powerful wizard.
					Accordingly, it seems highly unlikely that Dumbledore would be so
					incredibly nonchalant about Snape and Draco were he not in some
					way already clued in to their plans. Harry is bewildered by Dumbledore’s
					behavior, but since we can infer that Dumbledore knows things he
					is not telling Harry, we get a sense of foreshadowing that events
					will turn out in a way that will surprise Harry. Before Dumbledore
					and Harry leave for the cave, Dumbledore insists that Harry give
					his word that he will follow any and all of Dumbledore’s orders.
					Again, Rowling is foreshadowing events to come. Harry reluctantly
					promises to do whatever Dumbledore tells him to, no matter how unpleasant
					or disappointing, and we begin to suspect that their journey may
					be more tumultuous than expected—and that Dumbledore, once again,
					knows exactly what lies ahead.

