As the novel’s narrator and protagonist, Paul is the central
				figure in All Quiet on the Western Front and serves
				as the mouthpiece for Remarque’s meditations about war. Throughout
				the novel, Paul’s inner personality is contrasted with the way the
				war forces him to act and feel. His memories of the time before
				the war show that he was once a very different man from the despairing
				soldier who now narrates the novel. Paul is a compassionate and
				sensitive young man; before the war, he loved his family and wrote
				poetry. Because of the horror of the war and the anxiety it induces,
				Paul, like other soldiers, learns to disconnect his mind from his
				feelings, keeping his emotions at bay in order to preserve his sanity
				and survive.

As a result, the compassionate young man becomes unable
				to mourn his dead comrades, unable to feel at home among his family, unable
				to express his feelings about the war or even talk about his experiences,
				unable to remember the past fully, and unable to conceive of a future
				without war. He also becomes a “human animal,” capable of relying
				on animal instinct to kill and survive in battle. But because Paul
				is extremely sensitive, he is somewhat less able than many of the
				other soldiers to detach himself completely from his feelings, and
				there are several moments in the book (Kemmerich’s death, Kat’s
				death, the time that he spends with his ill mother) when he feels
				himself pulled down by emotion. These surging feelings indicate
				the extent to which war has programmed Paul to cut himself off from
				feeling, as when he says, with devastating understatement, “Parting
				from my friend Albert Kropp was very hard. But a man gets used to
				that sort of thing in the army.”

Paul’s experience is intended to represent the experience
				of a whole generation of men, the so-called lost generation—men
				who went straight from childhood to fighting in World War I, often
				as adolescents. Paul frequently considers the past and the future
				from the perspective of his entire generation, noting that, when
				the war ends, he and his friends will not know what to do, as they
				have learned to be adults only while fighting the war. The longer
				that Paul survives the war and the more that he hates it, the less
				certain he is that life will be better for him after it ends. This
				anxiety arises from his belief that the war will have ruined his
				generation, will have so eviscerated his and his friends’ minds
				that they will always be “bewildered.” Against such depressing expectations,
				Paul is relieved by his death: “his face had an expression of calm,
				as though almost glad the end had come.” The war becomes not merely
				a traumatic experience or a hardship to be endured but something
				that actually transforms the essence of human existence into irrevocable, endless
				suffering. The war destroys Paul long before it kills him.

