In 1989, Stevenson opens the new nonprofit legal services center in Alabama, later named the Equal Justice Initiative (EJI). He faces numerous obstacles with staffing and funding but perseveres. Almost immediately, Stevenson attempts to prevent the executions of two men—Michael Lindsey and Horace Dunkins—but is unsuccessful. Lindsey was sentenced to life without parole, but the judge overrode the jury and changed it to a death sentence. In Alabama, this practice is allowed, and judges often override life sentences to appear tough on crime to voters. Dunkins suffered from an intellectual disability, and at the time of his execution, the Supreme Court had not yet banned the practice of executing condemned people with disabilities. 

Stevenson then receives a call from Herbert Richardson, another man on death row facing imminent execution. Herbert is a veteran who experienced post-traumatic stress disorder after returning from Vietnam, which exacerbated issues stemming from childhood abuse. After his girlfriend broke up with him, Herbert, obsessed with getting her back, came up with a misguided plan. He set off a small bomb on her porch with the intention of saving her from the bomb, but instead her niece was killed by the explosion. Herbert was soon arrested, and the all-white jury found him guilty and sentenced him to death. Herbert’s lawyer refused to appeal the case, and Herbert has spent eleven years on death row.

Stevenson knows he’s unlikely to save Herbert’s life because Supreme Court rulings have made it harder to block executions. Stevenson identifies several issues: Herbert’s case was not a capital murder case; his past trauma should have excluded him from the death penalty; and the death sentence wasn’t imposed with careful consideration. Stevenson obtains a court hearing to present evidence about Herbert’s intent, but the judge refuses the petition. At the hearing, Stevenson meets the victim’s family, who do not believe Herbert should be executed. Stevenson appeals for a stay to the Supreme Court, which is denied only hours before the execution. 

Stevenson rushes to the prison to wait with Herbert and his family. When the prison officer comes for Herbert, Herbert’s wife refuses to leave, angering the waiting officials. Stevenson starts to hum a hymn, “The Old Rugged Cross,” that Herbert requested be played at the execution, which calms Herbert’s wife. Stevenson persuades her to let Herbert go. Stevenson joins Herbert in the death chamber where the men pray together, and then Herbert is strapped into the electric chair. The experience causes Stevenson to reflect on the inhumanity of preparing someone to be killed and makes him even more determined to find staff and resources to help condemned prisoners.

Through the story of Herbert Richardson, Stevenson reinforces the idea that even a sliver of hope can provide light in the darkness, helping to explain why people continue to fight against such a flawed justice system. In his conversations with Richardson, Stevenson illustrates that both he and the prisoner know hope for a successful appeal or stay of execution is slim. However, just knowing that Stevenson and his organization exist gives Richardson hope. Stevenson faces barriers of his own including a shortage of time, staff, funding, and basic office equipment. Still, he’s unnerved by his initial refusal to take Richardson’s case, suggesting he needs to provide hope in darkness as much as the inmate needs to receive it. Though the court fails to grant a stay of execution, Richardson’s proud introduction of Stevenson as his lawyer highlights the meaningfulness of Stevenson’s representation. Richardson turns his attention to the distribution of his American flag and other meager assets, suggesting a hope that he will be remembered, that he still has some control, and that his life meant something more than his crime. Though burdened by Richardson’s death, Stevenson’s growing resolve to help his clients and belief that things will improve illustrate his own hope in the darkness of his work.

Rather than explain the long-term impact of trauma in technical terms, Stevenson presents the stories of his clients to show how the justice system permanently changes the lives of the people it wrongfully convicts. Herbert Richardson survived brutal conditions as a soldier in the Vietnam War. The compounding trauma followed him back to civilian life. Stevenson shares Richardson’s story to personalize the painful details, then adds statistics to demonstrate that he’s not the only veteran who struggles with trauma and ended up in prison. Stevenson also stresses Richardson’s intelligence, aptitude for electronics, and kindness to neighborhood children, to inspire empathy. However, he suggests the legal system has no interest in these details, revealing that none of Richardson’s background or military service was presented at trial. Stevenson highlights how trauma unassisted makes Richardson an easy target for a broken justice system. 

Stevenson uses haunting details to highlight the shamefulness surrounding Richardson’s execution. As Stevenson approaches the prison to witness Richardson’s execution, the presence of armed men sitting on the backs of trucks suggests that they would be willing to take a life in order to ensure Richardson’s life comes to an end. When Richardson’s family is asked to leave, the family’s emotional reaction and the officials’ anger intensify the unnatural discomfort at a man’s life ending on a strict schedule. Richardson’s body is shaved to facilitate a clean execution. Richardson reveals that knowing he’ll be killed makes this time much stranger than his time in Vietnam, suggesting execution is more horrific than war. Stevenson shares the many offers of help Richardson receives for small things throughout the day, contrasted with the inadequate help he received as a veteran suffering from severe PTSD. According to Stevenson, the details of Richardson’s final hours reflect the wrongness of killing as a means of justice. 

