On Christmas Eve day, everyone prepares for Christmas,
					and optimism is in the air. Valerian and Margaret have slept together
					for the first time in a while, Margaret plans to cook the Christmas
					dinner herself, and Valerian apologizes to Margaret for being insensitive when
					Son appeared. In the kitchen Ondine complains to Sydney about the
					elaborate menu Margaret has planned, and she worries about Jadine’s
					relationship with Son. At night none of the invited guests arrive
					and Michael has not called, but Margaret and Valerian still hold
					out hope for Christmas Day.

In the morning there is still no word from Michael. The
					characters exchange gifts in a casual, individual way rather than
					in a group ceremony, and Margaret stops cooking halfway through
					her recipes, leaving Ondine to finish with much irritation. Ondine
					fears that Jadine has secret plans to leave the island. While Ondine
					cooks, Margaret sits by the pool, and Son scares her when he approaches. She
					tells him about Michael and about the work Michael does on an Indian
					reservation. She thinks it is wonderful that Michael influences
					the Indians to stay close to their heritage. As she talks she lets it
					slip that Jadine plans to leave the island soon.

At night the Streets and Sydney’s family eat together
					with Son, and everyone is trying extra hard to have a good time.
					Margaret makes up excuses for Michael’s silent absence, and everyone
					pretends Margaret cooked the meal. Son says he is disappointed Gideon
					could not come, and Valerian asks who Gideon is. Son tells everyone
					that they call Gideon and Thérése by the wrong names. Valerian says
					he fired Gideon and Thérèse in the course of the day for stealing
					some of the apples he imported for Margaret’s apple pie recipe.
					Ondine is outraged that he fired Gideon and Thérèse without asking
					her or Sydney for their opinion. Son fumes that Valerian can so
					casually dismiss the people on whose labor and land he has made a
					fortune. He thinks capitalism is a giant system of waste. He becomes
					more furious when Jadine defends Valerian’s actions.

Son asks Valerian whether he would have given Gideon and Thérèse
					some apples if they had asked for them, and Valerian says he would
					have, but they chose to steal instead. Son says this is an absurd
					response given that Gideon rowed the apples eighteen miles to bring
					them to Valerian and that Valerian just wanted the apples so that
					Margaret could play the role of an American mother. In his mind,
					Valerian sees a hundred European knights of chivalry riding the
					hills, while in Son’s mind, he sees a hundred black blind horsemen
					roving the island, still connected to the land. Valerian demands that
					Son leave the house, and Son refuses. Jadine tries to smooth things
					over, but Valerian says he does not care about a cook’s hurt feelings.
					He and Sydney argue, and Ondine insults Margaret, saying she is
					better than her. Valerian says Ondine is fired, and Margaret throws
					a glass of water at her. Ondine slaps Margaret, and the two women
					grapple. Valerian demands that the harbor police be called, but
					no one obeys his orders.

The two women are separated, and they hurl racial slurs
					at each other. Then Ondine reveals the truth: When Michael was young, Margaret
					used to torture him by sticking him with pins and burning him with
					cigarettes. Ondine was witness to the ongoing practice. She gets
					hysterical, and Sydney leads her away. Valerian is speechless and
					horrified. Margaret is still and quiet; she does not deny it.

Jadine and Son go upstairs together to her room. Jadine
					asks Son what the night means, and he says that white people and
					black people should not sit down together. He tells her to go to
					sleep, and she tells him he can stay with her but cannot have sex
					with her. He takes off his shirt to get ready for bed, and she notices
					that his hands are very big and powerful. They begin a sexually
					charged conversation, with her saying she does not want sex, and
					him saying he does not either, while both act the opposite. They
					turn off the light. She asks what he would do to her, if he were
					going to do something to her. He asks her to close her eyes. Then
					Son has her imagine what it is like to be a star in the sky. He
					says stars “throb” rather than twinkle and that when they can no
					longer throb, they fall out of the sky.

The chapter begins with a description of the island that
					is in sync with the personal experiences of the inhabitants of the
					house. The whole island is in flower, and even Valerian’s imported
					hydrangeas have bloomed. The implication is that there has been
					a reconciliation between nature and civilization, or between the
					island and its foreign visitors. The establishment of this reconciliation
					makes the eruption of conflict later in the chapter all the more
					dramatic and effective.

Michael’s absence on Christmas Eve foreshadows a conflict among
					the characters. The repeated sentence “nobody was in his proper
					place” not only refers to the characters’ state of mind, but it also
					alludes to the fact that the different characters are in unusual physical
					locations in the house: Ondine in the bathtub, Sydney in the greenhouse,
					Margaret in the kitchen. This placement of the characters also refers
					to the coming disruption of the established hierarchy. Ondine and
					Sydney now join Valerian and Margaret at the same dinner table,
					which indicates how much the hierarchy has already changed.

Son starts the confrontation that shatters the order of
					the household, as befits his status as the catalyst for all of the
					events in the novel. His fury over Valerian’s firing of Gideon and
					Thérèse prompts Ondine to confront her masters and ultimately reveal
					Margaret’s abuse of Michael. This act not only destroys the bond
					of obedience that had tied Ondine and Sydney to Valerian and Margaret, but
					it also demolishes Valerian’s authority. As long as he was indisputably
					in charge of the house, no one would challenge him. His unheeded
					demand that the police be called displays the beginning of his downfall
					and loss of power. When Ondine reveals Margaret’s abusive behavior
					toward Michael, Valerian can do nothing except sit there in shock
					and silence, because for once he cannot control the situation. Son’s
					confrontation begins a fight among all the characters and foreshadows
					the way nature will come to dominate civilization. 

The calmness between nature and civilization described
					at the beginning of the chapter is quickly shattered when the two
					main symbols of each side, Valerian for civilization and Son for
					nature, come into conflict. Gideon and Thérèse have been fired for
					stealing fruit, which is a product of nature. More important, Son’s
					anger is not just directed against Valerian for this single discrete
					act but against the whole system of industrial capitalism. To Son,
					Valerian does not see his employees, who work with nature, as people.
					Valerian has become disconnected from the natural world and from humanity’s
					relationship to it. He is the emblem of a culture that lives utterly
					cut off from the way humans have always lived, which is why he and
					his class foul the land that they inhabit. In that sense, Son actually
					sees Valerian and his ilk as lacking even “the dignity of wild animals.”
					They are so civilized that they are cruder than nature itself. Valerian
					embodies civilization in the way he imagines the wild horsemen,
					who elsewhere in the novel represent a bridge between nature and
					civilization. In Valerian’s mind, the horsemen are noble, European
					knights in shining armor following the Napoleonic code of civil
					law. In Son’s mind, and clearly closer to the truth of the myth of
					the horsemen, they have become a part of the island, knowing it so
					well that they merge with its natural environment. Son has “savanna
					eyes,” while Valerian’s are like the “head of a coin,” which symbolizes
					not just civilization but the importance of money in that civilization.

The conflict between Margaret and Ondine also parallels
					the divide between nature and civilization. As she is led away from
					the table, Ondine states that she is in charge of the house and
					Margaret is not. Throughout Tar Baby, the narrator
					clearly links feminine identity to nurturing, domesticity, and nature.
					Ondine’s insistence that she is the only woman in the house is directed
					toward Margaret, who perverted her natural role as a mother. In
					contrast to Margaret, Ondine is more comfortable with nature than
					civilization. Ondine has raised Jadine like her own daughter and
					had an influence on her, even though Jadine chose to leave the island.
					While Margaret, along with Valerian, has supported Jadine, she has
					not served as a mother figure. Her relationship with Jadine resembles
					a close friendship, and she was more concerned with helping Jadine
					establish herself in society than mothering her. Jadine also struggles
					with her feminine identity because she does not want to be nurturing
					and domestic like Ondine. She is more similar to Margaret, who only
					thinks about herself.

