Humbert eagerly anticipates caressing the unconscious
					Lolita. He claims that he hadn’t planned on taking Lolita’s innocence
					or purity but merely wanted to fondle her while she slept. He admits
					that it should have been clear to him then that Lolita and Annabel
					were not the same, and that if he had known what pain and trouble
					would follow, he would have done things differently. Downstairs,
					Humbert wanders through the hotel’s public rooms. On the terrace,
					he encounters a man who insinuatingly accuses him of behaving inappropriately
					with Lolita. Each time Humbert asks the man to repeat himself, however,
					the man feigns innocence and pretends to make idle chit-chat about
					the weather. The man, who remains half-hidden in the shadows, invites
					Humbert and Lolita to lunch the following day, but Humbert plans
					to be gone with Lolita by then.

Humbert returns to the hotel room to find Lolita half
					awake. He climbs into bed with her but doesn’t make any advances.
					Anxious and excited, Humbert stays awake all night. In the morning,
					Lolita wakes up and nuzzles him as he feigns sleep. She asks him
					if he ever had sex as a youth. When Humbert says no, Lolita has
					sex with him. Humbert states that, for her, sex was just another
					activity between children, unconnected to what adults do behind
					closed doors. 

Humbert launches into a dreamy description of how he would repaint
					the Enchanted Hunters hotel in order to make the setting of his
					first encounter with Lolita a more natural, romantic one.

Humbert once again defends his actions as natural, using
					history as evidence. He notes that according to an old magazine
					in the prison library, a girl from the more temperate climates of
					America becomes mature in her twelfth year. He further reminds the
					reader, whom he calls his jury, that he wasn’t even Lolita’s first
					lover. 

Lolita recounts her first sexual experiences. Astonished
					by Humbert’s naïveté, she tells him that many of her friends have
					already experimented sexually with one another. At summer camp,
					she used to stand guard while her friend Barbara and Charlie, the
					camp-mistress’s son, copulated in the bushes. Soon, Lolita’s curiosity
					led her to have sex with Charlie as well, and she and Barbara began
					taking turns with the boy. Lolita says it was fun but expresses
					contempt for Charlie’s manners and intelligence. Humbert gives Lolita
					the various presents he bought for her, and they prepare to leave
					the hotel. He warns Lolita not to talk to strangers. He later notices
					a man, about his age, staring at Lolita while she reads a movie
					magazine in an armchair. Humbert thinks the man resembles his Swiss
					uncle Gustave. 

Humbert becomes upset by Lolita’s shifting moods and her
					seeming disinterest in him, and he worries about how to keep their
					new arrangement a secret. As they drive off, he tries to uncover
					what Lolita’s friends know about her sexuality, but Lolita is in
					a bad mood and irritated by Humbert’s touches. Humbert feels guilty
					but still desires her, and she remains confused and unhappy. Even
					as he tries to cheer her up, Lolita says that she was only an innocent
					girl and that she should tell the police that Humbert raped her.
					Humbert can’t tell if she’s joking or not. Lolita complains of pains
					and accuses Humbert of tearing something inside her. Lolita becomes
					angry and upset and demands to call her mother. Humbert tells her
					that her mother is dead. 

Humbert buys Lolita many things in the town of Lepingville.
					In the hotel, they have separate rooms, and he can hear Lolita crying. Sometime
					in the night, she creeps into his bed because, as Humbert says,
					she has nowhere else to go.

As Humbert and Lolita’s relationship transforms into a
					blatantly sexual one, Humbert’s demonstrated duplicity and seductive
					skill with language should make us question whether we can fully
					trust his description of the affair. In particular, Humbert’s claim
					that Lolita seduced him, rather than the other way around, seems
					suspicious. Like many adolescents, Lolita appears to have mixed
					feelings toward sex, ranging from mild repulsion to enthusiastic
					curiosity. Until now, she has appeared to be a flirtatious, vulgar
					girl of mercurial moods, whose supposed crush on Humbert varies
					in intensity from moment to moment. As she eagerly questions Humbert
					about his sexual relationship with her mother, we can see that she
					clearly has a teenager’s typical interest in sexuality. However,
					despite the passionate kisses she shares with Humbert, sex seems
					mostly a game to Lolita. She describes her clandestine encounters
					with Charlie as fun, but in the same chapter she makes reference
					to the “disgusting” things that she learned at camp. She clearly
					enjoys Humbert’s attentions yet often grows bored with his unceasing
					ardor. 

Humbert doesn’t describe the actual act of sex with Lolita
					in any detail. One reason may be that his desire for Lolita encompasses something
					beyond physical lust—even when Humbert drugs Lolita, he mostly daydreams
					about examining her body, rather than about actually forcing himself
					on her. In some sense, Humbert’s refusal to describe the event explicitly
					may represent a desire to preserve the sanctity of the act, or of
					Lolita herself. However, Humbert’s reticence about the physical
					act of sex may be simply a strategy to keep the reader from being
					too disgusted with him, enabling him to keep alive the romantic
					element of his narrative. 

Whether or not Lolita initiates the seduction, it would
					be hard to argue that Lolita consciously intends to transform her
					relationship with Humbert into a real love affair. Left to her own
					devices, Lolita might not have chosen to continue with Humbert after
					their initial sexual encounter. Indeed, after their first night
					together, Lolita becomes sullen. Her frequent references to rape
					and incest indicate that she understands the impropriety of their
					relationship, but her cool self-awareness suggests that she isn’t
					as outraged as we might expect. However, despite the fact that Lolita
					often seems quite composed and self-controlled for a child, the
					fact remains that she is deeply affected by her first sexual encounter
					with an adult. Like many adolescents, she isn’t prepared to handle
					the emotions that arise from sex, let alone the emotions that arise
					from sex with a grown man who happens to be her stepfather. The
					next morning, she wants to call her mother. While she may not exactly
					understand what has gone wrong, she still seeks consolation from
					the person who was supposed to be her protector.

Just as Humbert consummates his relationship with Lolita,
					Clare Quilty appears as Humbert’s dark shadow. Quilty remains a
					mysterious form throughout the novel, a trickster figure and a game player
					who never quite comes to light. Lolita fascinates him, but Quilty
					doesn’t seem as controlled by his desires as Humbert is by his.
					This self-control will eventually distinguish Quilty from Humbert
					in Lolita’s eyes. Humbert, unaware of the role that Quilty will play
					in his life and the danger he represents, fails to recognize him
					as the celebrity that Lolita adores, and whom he himself resembles. Instead,
					he notes Quilty’s resemblance to a Swedish relative of his, Gustave
					Trapp. This represents an ironic kind of recognition, since Trapp
					and Humbert, being relatives, presumably resemble each other as
					well. The fact that Humbert links Quilty with Trapp, rather than
					himself, seems a perverse refusal to admit how he and Quilty are
					connected—and, ultimately, very similar. Humbert’s inability to see
					Quilty—to neither recognize nor to literally see him, since he is often
					standing at a distance, or in the shadows—represents an powerlessness
					on Humbert’s part to accurately see himself.

Freed from the constraint of friends, family, and watchful
					society, Humbert can now take advantage of Lolita, since, as he
					himself observes, Lolita has nowhere else to go. As the novel progresses, Humbert’s
					control over Lolita becomes more and more forceful, just as she
					tries harder and harder to escape. Significantly, Lolita surrenders
					to Humbert in the town of Lepingville, a name that recalls Nabokov’s
					fascination with lepidoptery, or the study of butterflies. Like
					a butterfly collector, Humbert will pin Lolita down and eventually
					drain her of the lively, whimsical quality that he loved in the
					first place. 

By the end of this section, Humbert seems to have passed
					a point of no return, abandoning his already tenuous commitment
					to morality or decency. For example, despite her problems with her mother,
					Lolita becomes understandably distraught upon hearing of Charlotte’s
					death and cries herself to sleep. Yet Humbert remains steadfastly
					attached to his plan, even as he knows that she crawls into bed
					with him because she has nowhere else to go. His obsession leads
					him to believe that he can fulfill all of Lolita’s needs and keep her
					from needing anyone else besides him. This belief represents one of
					Humbert’s many delusions about Lolita. He remains remarkably insensitive
					to her feelings, ascribing her sullenness to mysterious bad moods
					rather than genuine grief at her mother’s death or genuine disgust
					with the sexual act. Humbert sees only his own nymphet, not the
					real thirteen-year-old girl. Charlotte was similarly obsessed with
					Humbert and saw only an erudite European, rather than a dissolute,
					middle-aged pedophile. Both parental figures are blinded by their
					own passion and fail to be proper parents and protectors to Lolita.

