“Before you criticize someone, you should
						walk a mile in their shoes. That way, when you criticize them, you are
						a mile away from them, and you have their shoes.”

Carmen, Lydia, and Krista go to a dressmaker to try on
					the wedding gown and dresses. Barbara, the dressmaker, is shocked
					that Carmen is related to Albert, and Carmen tells her snippily
					that her mother is Puerto Rican. Carmen’s bridesmaid dress doesn’t
					fit, and Barbara complains about having to fix it. Carmen, insulted
					by Barbara’s tone, storms out, insulting Lydia’s dress on the way.

At Wallman’s, Bailey compliments Tibby’s Pants, which
					she just received from Lena. Tibby tells her a little about what
					the girls have been doing. Bailey asks what happened to Bridget’s
					mother, and Tibby says she had “bad depression.” Bailey has started
					spending a lot of time with Tibby, even working on the movie in
					Tibby’s room while Tibby is at Wallman’s. Today, they interview
					Margaret, a woman who works at the movie theater. Margaret has worked
					there for more than thirty years and knows whole movie scenes by
					heart. Tibby is ready to inwardly mock her, but she then notices
					how tiny Margaret is. She and Bailey are both chastened. Bailey
					suggests they all watch a movie together. Tibby realizes that Margaret
					probably watches most movies alone.

Bridget sneaks to Eric’s cabin late at night. Along the
					way, she remembers what a psychiatrist once wrote about her: that
					she was “single-minded to the point of recklessness.” At the cabin,
					she accidentally wakes Eric up. He chastises her for coming over,
					but, half-asleep, he doesn’t pull away when Bridget touches his
					head and chest. Then he tells her to leave because he can’t deal
					with it. Bridget interprets this as encouragement.

“Time tells the truth.”

Bailey wants Tibby to interview her for the movie, and
					she tells Tibby to ask her hard questions. Tibby asks Bailey what
					she’s afraid of, and Bailey says she fears not having time to figure
					out other people or for them to figure her out. Tibby sends the
					Pants to Carmen with a note that says she isn’t really sure yet
					what to make of her time with them.

Lena’s grandmother is upset because Kostos’s family is
					ignoring her. Lena feels guilty to have shattered her illusions
					about Kostos, but she still can’t tell the truth. Her grandmother
					hints that Kostos has suffered some kind of hardship. When Lena
					finally tells Effie what happened, Effie says she feels sorry for
					Kostos.

Bridget tries to call Tibby, but the connection is bad
					and the housekeeper, Loretta, says Tibby isn’t home.

Before dinner, Carmen puts on the Pants, ready to confront
					Lydia and Albert about what happened at the dressmaker’s. But no
					one says a word about it. Carmen feels like she doesn’t even exist.
					She leaves the house, slamming the door behind her.

Although Tibby intended her movie to document pathetic
					people who were worthy of being laughed at, she is beginning to
					realize that the people she’d mocked are actually human beings with
					quirky, unique personalities and sad stories. Margaret, the movie
					theater employee who knows movie dialogue by heart and has seen
					thousands of movies, is more than the pathetic caricature Tibby
					thought she was. Instead, Tibby realizes that Margaret is very lonely
					and possibly even ill in some way. When Tibby faced her long summer and
					her deadly job at Wallman’s, she assumed she’d be superior to everyone
					who crossed her path. She also assumed she had the right to make
					fun of people whose lives and goals were different from hers. But
					as she and Bailey take time to actually talk to people, Tibby starts
					to realize she’s been unfair, even mean. Her documentary, as a result,
					is turning out very differently than she’d expected.

Until now, Bridget has seemed lively, courageous, and
					reckless, and readers might even admire her carefree ways. But,
					as we learn more about Bridget, her wild behavior takes on darker
					undertones. For the first time, we learn something about what happened
					to Bridget’s mother, as Tibby reveals she had “bad depression.”
					This suggests that Bridget’s mother had psychological problems that
					led directly to her death, perhaps by suicide. We also learn that
					Bridget has seen a psychiatrist, and that he was concerned about
					her “single-mindedness.” Her fixation on Eric and her inability
					to stop playing soccer aggressively even when her coach was unhappy
					with her suggest that Bridget is indeed recklessly single-minded.
					Because of the new information we have about Bridget, she seems
					as though she is somehow flirting with danger rather than being
					simply fun-loving and young.

As Carmen struggles to get to know her father’s new family
					in South Carolina, she must also struggle to maintain her sense
					of identity among unflattering, even racist, comments and observations. Carmen’s
					mother is Puerto Rican, and Carmen has inherited her dark skin and
					curvy figure. She doesn’t look like her father, and she stands out
					among Lydia, Krista, and Paul, who are thin and blond. Carmen feels
					the family’s surprise acutely when they first meet her, since she
					isn’t what they imagined Albert’s daughter to look like, and she
					is pained by the dressmaker’s overtly troubled expression when Carmen
					tries to explain that she is in fact Albert’s daughter. Carmen doesn’t
					easily fit into the new life her father has created, just as she
					doesn’t fit into the ugly bridesmaid dress that’s been selected for
					her. What’s even worse for Carmen is that she feels as if her father
					prefers his new, blond family over her and her mother. Carmen isn’t
					ashamed of who she is, but she struggles to keep a firm hold on
					her identity among so many unfamiliar people and places.

Although some of the girls’ problems are trivial, such
					as crushes, mindless summer jobs, and annoying siblings, other problems
					are incredibly painful and force the girls to accept a maturity
					they are often not ready for. Problems such as these will occur
					again and again, as these problems (as well as great joys) are part
					of being an adult. Bailey, for example, struggles with cancer, facing
					the fact that people treat her differently when they find out she’s
					sick. Wry, sarcastic Tibby is realizing uneasily that the people
					she habitually makes fun of are actually human beings who can touch
					her emotionally. Bridget has dealt with her mother’s tragic death
					and perhaps some psychological troubles of her own. Carmen faces
					racism in South Carolina, as she tries to fit in among a blond family
					that doesn’t know what to make of her Puerto Rican heritage. And
					Lena must cope with the fact that her inability to trust and her
					severe self-consciousness have hurt Kostos and her grandparents.
					The way these characters have always seen the world is being challenged
					this summer, forcing them to come to terms with their own mistakes, misperceptions,
					and attitudes.

