The stage directions instruct Mrs. Peachum and Jenny to
					step out in front of the curtain for a brief scene. In the interlude,
					Mrs. Peachum tells Jenny to turn in Macheath if she sees him. Jenny
					asks whether she will be seeing him if he is a hunted man. Mrs.
					Peachum assures her that Macheath will never give up his routine,
					then sings “The Ballad of Sexual Submissiveness.” The song describes
					a man who is tough but who cannot resist women. In the second verse,
					Mrs. Peachum describes men more generally, explaining that no matter
					what a man’s beliefs are, all men desire sex when night comes.

The scene continues at the brothel in Wapping. One of Macheath’s
					thieves, Jacob, is sitting in the whorehouse, reading the newspaper.
					Around him, the whores iron clothes and do the wash like a normal
					household. As Jacob comments that Macheath definitely will not be
					showing up, Macheath walks in and asks for his coffee. Jacob is
					horrified, but Macheath explains that the day is Thursday, and he
					is not about to let “trifles” disrupt his habits. He throws the
					warrant for his arrest on the floor. Jacob begins reading it with
					great amusement. Jenny offers to read Macheath’s palm. She examines
					his hand and sees a woman’s treachery. Macheath asks for the woman’s
					name, and Jenny says she cannot tell except that it begins with
					a J. Macheath says she must have it wrong because he knows it begins
					with a P, admitting that he expects Polly to betray him. He is distracted
					by Jacob’s laughter while reading the warrant, and the two men strike
					up a conversation with some other whores about underwear. Jenny
					sneaks out the door.

Macheath becomes nostalgic. He sings about how he and
					Jenny used to live together before he was such a master criminal.
					Then he continues to explain their story in “The Ballad of the Fancy
					Man.” As he sings, Jenny is outside, beckoning Constable Smith.
					Macheath continues to sing about how he used to be both Jenny’s
					boyfriend and pimp. Their arrangement was cozy, he sings, and he
					would give anything to be able to see the whorehouse where they
					used to live. Jenny then takes up the song for a verse. She sings
					about how sweet Macheath used to be and how he would sell her clothes
					and beat her black and blue. They join together for the chorus about
					wishing to see their old whorehouse again. Then they exchange a
					series of darkly comic lines. The beginning of their collaboration
					is about how they could only sleep together in the afternoons because
					her nights were always booked. The second is about how when she
					got pregnant, they flushed the baby down the sewer. They dance until Constable
					Smith stops them. He tries to put handcuffs on Macheath, but Macheath
					shoves him away and leaps out the window, only to run smack into
					Mrs. Peachum with more constables. With poise, he politely inquires
					after Mrs. Peachum’s husband and then is led away to jail.

Macheath’s appearance at the brothel in Wapping highlights
					the human desire for sex. Sex is a physical urge, and the characters’ actions
					are primarily driven by material, physical desires throughout the
					play. Seeing how sex renders everyone the same allows the audience
					to see how flimsy and changeable society can be. After all, if everyone
					is the same at the bottom, then the customs and ideas that are put
					on top are all artificial. By establishing a common principle of
					understanding, humanity can be analyzed and perhaps changed. After
					the interlude, the plot in scene II proceeds exactly as Mrs. Peachum
					predicted, and Macheath proves the principle in “The Ballad of Sexual
					Obsession.” He cannot master his sexual appetite, and his physical
					longings are what doom him, not the cruel nature of his crimes.

The prostitutes’ household activities emphasize that they
					are not so different from the rest of society, because they have
					similar responsibilities. Traditional morality holds that prostitutes
					are “fallen” women, beyond redemption because they spend their lives immersed
					in base sexuality. Sex is automatically associated with immorality.
					This view counters the contention that perhaps these women are relatively
					free, because they have control over what they sell (that is, their
					bodies), unlike those who rely on employers. However, the life of
					a prostitute is not glorified in this scene, as evidenced by the
					beatings and thieving that Jenny describes in her duet with Macheath.
					However, Bretcht does not belittle the life of a prostitute. The
					peacefulness of the prostitutes’ domestic arrangements shows that
					they contribute to society like the rest of the social system.


The Threepenny Opera employs biblical
					parallels to connect Macheath with Jesus. Jenny betrays Macheath,
					and her name begins with a J, just like Judas. Macheath is also
					betrayed on a Thursday and sent to the gallows on a Friday, paralleling
					the fate of Jesus. The fact that Macheath is a true criminal, as
					opposed to the spiritual threat to traditional authority that Christ
					was, complicates sympathy for him. Macheath as a Christ figure further
					points to the emptiness and randomness of the values system. Sympathy
					for Macheath is further entangled by the irony of the duet he sings
					with Jenny. In the lyrics of the song, Macheath comes off as a truly
					horrible person, a pimp who beat his girlfriend and casually killed
					their unwanted child. The incongruity of the song and the brutal
					events it describes are purposeful: The play urges the audience
					to enjoy something that would normally be treated as vile. The lyrics
					in the song allow the audience to see beyond the immediate reactions
					of pity and horror and to begin to see the arbitrariness of values
					that these characters possess.

Jenny presents another ironic twist on a classic archetype:
					the prostitute with a heart of gold. Just as Macheath is an ironic
					hero and Peachum is an ironic villain, Jenny is an ironic prostitute
					with a sentimental heart. Like the archetype, Jenny is a good girl
					who is sweet and caring about her former love and pimp, Macheath. Unlike
					the archetype, though, Jenny is willing to hand over Macheath to
					the cops in exchange for cash. She cannot resist pursuing her own
					self-interest like everyone else. So, Jenny chooses money over loyalty
					to Macheath. She, like Polly, is conflicted between self-interest
					and love, even though she ultimately chooses self-interest.

