Mami and Papi had worked in the United States for almost
					four years before a small revolution in the Dominican Republic convinced
					them to become citizens in New York. The sisters complained about
					the less prosperous conditions in the United States and wanted to
					go home to the Island. Then Carla met a pervert, the sisters were
					subjected to ethnic slurs at school, and Sandra tried a tampon.
					Because of these shocking and disgraceful events, the girls were
					then sent away to boarding schools to avoid these kinds of American
					problems.

Their peers at school assumed the girls were rich and
					related to dictators because they were foreign students in expensive
					boarding schools. Their privilege seemed more mysterious and not
					as familiar as Hoover vacuum cleaners or Hanes panty hose. The sisters enjoyed
					the freedom of living away from home by kissing boys and smoking
					cigarettes. They tried to keep their parents from suspecting that
					they were learning American vices, but they could not hide for long.
					The parents then decided that the girls would be sent back to the
					Island for the summers to reconnect them to their extended families
					and Dominican culture.

The sisters got in trouble with their mother for a small
					bag of marijuana that had fallen behind the bed. Sofia admitted
					to possession of the drugs and was punished with a year in the Dominican Republic
					rather than American boarding school. After six months, she had
					changed her appearance and wore her hair and makeup with way Dominican
					women did. She had also started dating her uncle's illegitimate
					son, Manuel, who turned out to be bossy and possessive. When they
					went to the Island for Christmas, the three other sisters felt outraged
					by his sexist and provincial Dominican attitudes toward women and
					tried to humiliate him by drawing on their American feminism. They
					ridiculed his ignorance of Mary Wollstonecraft while making fun
					of his macho insecurities.

Manuel pressured Sofia to have sex, but she resisted because
					she could not access contraception while in the Dominican Republic without
					causing a family scandal. One night while out on the town, their
					cousin Mundin brought the three sisters to a sleazy motel to show
					them the dark side of Dominican morality. While there, innocently
					enjoying the scenery, they noticed Manuel's car. The three sisters
					were outraged that Sofia was sleeping with a man who refused to
					wear a condom, and they decided to get the two lovers into trouble.
					The three sisters insisted that Mundin take them home before Sofia
					and Manuel left the motel. This meant that the couple would be left
					without a chaperone, and the relatives would be outraged. Their
					mother decided that Sofia had to be sent back to the United States
					before her reputation was ruined. Sofia called her sisters traitors,
					but they insisted that she would get over her anger and fears.

Just as Yolanda has difficulties dating American men in
					the United States, Sofia has trouble maintaining a romantic relationship
					with a Dominican man in her home country. The four sisters have
					been exposed to casual attitudes toward sex and drugs in the United States,
					as well as concepts of feminist equality that don't translate easily
					into Dominican culture. The girls bounce between the taboos of each
					culture as their parents try to strike a balance and find a place
					for the sisters where their cultural and family roots can be supported
					and celebrated. The sisters have a problem with their parents sending
					them to the Dominican Republic because they have become so Americanized
					that they cannot understand or tolerate the sexual double standards
					that remain in more pronounced ways on the Island.

Sofia had spent six months trying to adapt to her new
					environment and reconnect to a culture and language that she had
					left behind as a very young child. Her romantic involvement with
					a first cousin who is illegitimate satisfies her American desire
					to shock and scandalize her provincial and closed-minded relatives.
					Yet at the same time, she wants to fit into Dominican culture and
					be appreciated by Manuel, so she tolerates his badgering comments
					about her clothes and behavior. She submits to his obsessively possessive nature
					in order to reintegrate herself into traditional Dominican gender
					roles.

Her sisters' reactions betray their difficulty relating
					to their home country's culture. Though they fully understand the
					consequences of manipulating the system of chaperones to expose
					Sofia's indiscretion and sexual activity, they refuse to accept
					Sofia's submission to Dominican sexual double standards. The sisters
					are also troubled by the possibility of Sofia's subordination to
					a male sexual partner through an unintended pregnancy. They betray
					Sofia's trust only in order to force upon her a more American cynicism
					toward romance and a more pragmatic attitude toward sex.

Their mother's reaction to Sofia's scandal reflects the
					difficulty all the sisters face in negotiating the space between
					the two cultures. While attending American boarding schools they
					experiment with American vices like marijuana, yet in the Dominican
					Republic they learn about illicit and unprotected sexual scandals.
					They disappoint their mother in both places because they do not
					behave as good Dominican girls ought to. This confirms her fear
					that they have lost their connection to the culture, and that she
					has failed in her effort to instill in them the values she grew
					up with.

