The family embarks on the journey to Canaan with their
					belongings and animals in tow. They find Inna, the midwife, sitting
					by the side of the road. She says that she is too old to lose her
					apprentice Rachel and would like to join their family in the journey.
					She offers her possessions in exchange for their protection and
					offers to act as their chief healer and servant. Jacob accepts,
					and the family is pleased to have the healer join them. 

After several days, Dinah becomes accustomed to traveling. They
					come to a wide river. Though Dinah has never seen a river before,
					she feels inextricably drawn to it. She savors the smell and daydreams
					by the water as the meals are prepared. The next morning, they each
					cross the river, guiding the animals. Dinah is entranced by the
					water and floats through it, dragged by Judah’s hand. Zilpah pronounces
					her a child of water and tells her that she will only be happy living
					by a river. Dinah spends the journey wandering among the caravan
					with her spindle, gathering herbs, and watching her family. She
					notes how differently Jacob treats his wives. He discusses food
					and plans with Leah, shares personal stories with Rachel, offers
					silent acknowledgments to Zilpah, and caresses Bilhah. She notices
					that Reuben and Bilhah frequent walk together. 

One day, Dinah hears the angry voice of her grandfather,
					Laban. He has come for his teraphim, which he is convinced Jacob
					has stolen. Jacob tells Laban to search the tents. He does so, even
					entering the red tent where the women sit during the new moon. When
					he enters, Rachel boldly confesses that she took the idols and has
					been sitting on them during her menstruation. She tells him that
					their magic has been turned against him and Laban leaves the tent.
					He says nothing to Jacob, and they part ways swearing peace to each other.

The next day, Jacob feels eager to move on and the women
					dismantle the red tent and continue the journey. Jacob begins to
					dwell on memories of his brother Esau. Fear grows within him, and
					he begins to worry that Esau will not embrace him and his family
					when they appear but will slaughter them instead. They encounter another
					river. Jacob sends his family and herd across, declaring that he
					will stay behind alone and cross early the next morning. The next morning,
					Jacob does not appear, and Reuben, Simon, and Judah cross back to
					find him. They find Jacob beaten and naked in a clearing nearby.
					Inna attends to his broken leg and fever. Jacob slowly begins to
					heal while the family stays by the river for two months. As he recovers,
					his fears of his brother grow even stronger and he can speak of
					nothing else. 

On the road, Dinah begins to realize the strength and
					power of Jacob’s family and begins to understand her own status
					within it. They are an impressive group, with eleven strong sons
					and a herd of healthy animals. Because they have lived in a remote
					location for so long, Dinah has not thought much about her extended
					family, but along the road she hears stories about her uncle Esau
					and his wives and children, her grandmother Rebecca, the Oracle
					at Mamre, and her legendary grandfather Isaac. Away from the familiarity
					of her home, Dinah’s eyes open to the outside world as she hears
					stories about her famous grandmother’s powers and the prosperity
					of her uncle. As the only daughter of Jacob, the blessed son of
					Rebecca and Isaac, she has special status in the family. She develops
					a sense of self-awareness, realizing that her world is growing and
					that she is a piece in a much larger puzzle than she had previously
					believed. 

The journey to Canaan parallels Dinah’s journey toward
					womanhood. As a girl, she spent very little time around the men
					in her family, as they were secluded in the pastures all day tending
					to the animals. Now she watches them, noticing their differences
					and similarities and their alliances and enemies. For the first
					time, she begins to see them as men and realizes that they will
					soon be taking wives. Since she has never witnessed much interaction
					between her father and her mothers, particularly all together, she
					takes careful notice of his attempts to keep them happy. Jacob has
					established a different relationship with each woman and communicates
					with each of them on different levels. As she observes the changing
					landscape, the rivers, and the other travelers, she learns that
					her mothers are no longer the center of the universe and her brothers
					are not the only men, and she enters adolescence. 

Jacob’s dream episode with the Angel of God marks the
					beginning of the transformation of his personality. He appears to
					Dinah to be gradually descending into madness, dreaming constantly
					of his brother so that his fear of fratricide grows by the day.
					He is weakened by his ill-fated night by the river, in which he
					is attacked by his dream, and the weeks of recovery that follow.
					Dinah hears him weep for the first time and call out for his mother
					like a child. She cannot reconcile this Jacob with the father that
					she knows so well from her mothers as a strong and able man. Dinah
					notes the changes in him, wondering why her family does not notice
					his transformation from loving to challenging, from assertive to
					hesitant. From then on he tends to lean on Levi rather than Reuben,
					which instills worry in Dinah’s heart. She knows that he has changed
					for the worse and perhaps she senses that he will contribute to
					her family’s undoing. 

