Humbert retraces the tour he and Lolita took across the
					country, attempting to find some clues as to Lolita’s whereabouts.
					As he revisits the 342 hotels and motels they stayed at, he learns
					that Lolita’s abductor had been following them for some time. The
					abductor has signed into various hotel registers with a series of
					sophisticated, wittily allusive fake names. Humbert deduces that
					Lolita and the kidnapper have been in touch since the beginning
					of their road trip.

Upon returning to Beardsley, Humbert plans to accost an
					art professor at Beardsley College, who once taught a class at Lolita’s
					school. As he sits outside the professor’s classroom with the gun
					in his pocket, Humbert realizes that his suspicions have made him
					paranoid. Humbert hires a detective, who proves to be useless. 

Humbert imagines he sees Lolita everywhere and tries rid
					himself of her possessions. He writes a missing persons ad in verse.
					Humbert psychoanalyzes his own poem but does not post it. 

In his loneliness, Humbert begins a relationship with
					Rita, a woman in her late twenties with a checkered history. Humbert
					finds her ignorant but comforting, and their relationship lasts
					for two years. During this time, Humbert gives up his search for
					Lolita’s abductor and spends his time wandering with Rita, drinking
					heavily. Nonetheless, he finds himself returning to the old hotels
					to relive memories of Lolita. He cannot, however, bring himself
					to go to the Enchanted Hunters hotel. Meanwhile, Rita grows increasingly unstable
					and becomes convinced that Humbert will leave her. 

Gradually, Rita and Humbert begin to live apart, though
					Humbert visits her frequently. During one visit, Humbert discovers
					that two letters have been forwarded to him. The first is from John
					Farlow, who remarried after Jean died of cancer. John states that
					he has handed over the complicated case of the Haze estate to an
					attorney named Jack Windmuller. The second letter is from Lolita.
					Addressing Humbert as “Dad,” she writes that she has become Mrs.
					Richard F. Schiller and is currently pregnant. She writes asking
					for money but withholds her home address in case Humbert is still angry. 

After reading the letter, Humbert goes in search of Lolita
					and her new husband. Taking the gun along with him, Humbert plans
					to kill Lolita’s husband, whom he assumes is the same man who abducted Lolita
					from the hospital. Though Lolita didn’t give her specific address,
					Humbert manages to find the town she lives in, Coalmont. Nervous
					and agitated, Humbert bathes and dresses in his finest clothes before
					inquiring after the Schillers.

Humbert finally tracks Lolita down to a small, clapboard
					house on Hunter Road. Lolita has grown taller and wears glasses
					now, and is hugely pregnant. Though she has matured past the nymphet
					stage, Humbert realizes he still loves her deeply. Humbert sees
					Lolita’s husband, Dick, a simple working man, outside in the yard.
					Lolita tells Humbert that Dick knows nothing about their past sexual
					relationship. Humbert realizes that Dick didn’t abduct Lolita from
					the hospital, and Lolita, wanting Humbert’s financial help, confesses
					that the man who took her was the playwright Clare Quilty. 

Lolita describes Quilty as the great love of her life.
					She tells Humbert that Quilty knew Charlotte and had come to Ramsdale
					many times to visit his uncle, Ivor Quilty, the dentist. Dick comes
					inside the house, and Lolita introduces Humbert as her father. Humbert realizes
					that he bears the man no ill will. When Dick returns outside, Lolita
					continues her story. After she ran away with Quilty, she lived on
					his ranch with his friends, all of whom engaged in strange sexual practices.
					Lolita refused to participate, claiming that she only loved Quilty,
					and Quilty kicked her out. She found work as a waitress and eventually
					met Dick. Humbert realizes that he will love Lolita until he dies
					and begs her to come away with him. Lolita thinks Humbert might
					give her money if she goes to a motel with him, but Humbert says
					he’ll give her the money regardless of her answer and hands her four
					thousand dollars. Lolita is excited by the money but firmly and gently
					refuses to go away with Humbert, saying she would rather go back
					to Quilty. Humbert leaves her with the money and drives off, weeping. 

These chapters continue to play with the idea that Lolita has
					transformed into a detective novel. After losing Lolita, Humbert
					goes on a wild goose chase, retracing their previous road trips.
					He uncovers seemingly incredible coincidences, such as when he realizes
					that he and Lolita met at 342 Lawn Street, consummated their relationship in
					Room 342 of the Enchanted Hunters hotel, and registered in 342 hotels
					across the United States. However, these clues don’t add up to anything.
					In the end, the presence of these incessant, repetitive numbers
					shows that Humbert was right, and McFate did indeed play a role
					in his journey. Beyond that, they represent nothing more than a meaningless
					string of fascinating flukes. 

Similarly, the clues that Lolita’s abductor has scattered
					along the way prove to be nothing more than teases, providing insights
					into the personality of the kidnapper but no concrete evidence as
					to his identity. We learn that the mysterious stranger is witty
					and well read, and shares Humbert’s own interest in puns and word
					games. However, the anagrams, Latin phrases, and literary allusions
					seem to do nothing more than proclaim their own presence, since
					Humbert eventually gives up on the prospect of finding Lolita. The
					mystery of Lolita’s disappearance can’t be solved by any ordinary
					kind of investigation, as we learn from the comically ineffectual
					detective Humbert ends up hiring. Long after any information might
					have proved useful, the private eye reports “an eighty-year-old
					Indian by the name of Bill Brown lived near Dolores, Colo.” The
					fake registry entry for a “Will Brown, Dolores, Colo.” ends up having
					an unexpected basis in reality, but the connection remains a specious
					one; for all the names and numbers Humbert collects, they end up amounting
					to nothing more than “nonsense data.”

Humbert’s reaction to losing Lolita, as well as his reaction
					to seeing her again, exemplifies just how complicated his feelings
					for Lolita truly are. Over the course of the novel, Humbert has
					always strived to demonstrate that he’s not a common pedophile.
					For example, he grants his desire mythic qualities, describing the
					objects of his affection as magical creatures capable of bewitching
					a man. Humbert believes that, rather than signifying some kind of
					deviant tendency, his love for young girls demonstrates his refined
					aesthetic sense. By linking all subsequent girls to the original
					girl, Annabel Leigh, Humbert also situates the girls within the
					dramatic narrative arc of his own life. The nymphets become symbols
					of Humbert’s deep, innate romanticism, not victims of his abnormal
					appetites. In this section of the novel, his attitude toward nymphets
					changes. Now that he’s lost Lolita, Humbert still finds himself
					sexually drawn to young girls, but he suppresses that craving more
					forcefully and can’t imagine copulating with them anymore. When
					he sees her again, he realizes that Lolita is now long past her
					nymphet phase, yet he finds that he’s still smitten with her. It’s
					up to the reader, as Humbert’s jury, to decide whether this devotion
					constitutes a genuinely selfless love and, if so, whether that excuses
					Humbert’s crimes.

Similarly, we have to determine whether Clare Quilty’s
					crimes are categorically worse than Humbert’s. Humbert would argue
					that his feelings for Lolita are authentically romantic, while Clare’s
					are basely sexual. Humbert has always situated his relationship
					with Lolita in a larger artistic context, comparing the two of them
					to figures from literature and history. Clare is an artist as well
					but produces the kind of art Humbert denigrates as vulgar and unsubtle. Given
					that Humbert has always tried—unsuccessfully—to cultivate a taste
					for fine art in Lolita, the fact that Lolita believes Clare to be a
					“genius” seems cruelly ironic. Humbert feels disgusted by Clare’s attempt
					to use his status as an artist to shield and excuse his perverse behavior.
					However, Humbert is just as guilty of artistically manipulating
					the situation. After all, Lolita is not a straightforward,
					disinterested account of the events in question. Humbert has taken literature,
					his chosen medium, and fashioned a piece of art that beguiles its
					audience as cleverly as Lolita beguiles him. 

