Campbell, while on the phone with his mother, wonders how much people are
					beholden to their parents. Campbell stops for coffee and gives his waiter a new
					sarcastic explanation of his service dog, Judge. He returns to his office and finds
					Anna there. Sara calls while Anna is in the room with Campbell. Sara tells Campbell
					that Anna has changed her mind, but Anna tells Campbell she has not. Campbell
					recalls a memory of his father. They competed in a sailing competition, and Campbell
					ended up embarrassing and disappointing his father. Campbell goes to the courthouse
					where he meets Sara, who decides to act as counsel for herself and Brian. Sara and
					Campbell speak with Judge DeSalvo, the judge for the case. They argue about what
					Anna really wants until Judge DeSalvo decides he needs to speak with
					Anna.

Anna wonders what her funeral would be like. She doesn’t think many people
					would come, unlike Kate’s funeral, which would be crowded. At the courthouse, Anna
					speaks with Judge DeSalvo alone. They discuss the trial, and Anna tries to remain
					composed. But she recalls a time when she and Kate pulled a prank on a nurse at the
					hospital and starts to cry. She tells Judge DeSalvo she can’t give a kidney to her
					sister. He assures her no hospital would take a kidney from an unwilling donor, but
					she says being a donor has never been her choice. She says she never wanted to stop
					the lawsuit and only told her mother she would because she loves her. Judge DeSalvo
					decides to appoint Anna a guardian ad litem who can decide what is best for her. The
					hearing, he says, will take place the following week.

Anna goes home with her parents, even though Campbell wants to speak with her.
					Brian pleads with Sara to calm down, but Sara shouts that Anna practically signed
					Kate’s death sentence. Kate runs upstairs. Anna leaves the house to go to a
					laundromat, a place she feels safe. She tries to picture a future without Kate but
					can’t. They are as connected, she thinks, as Siamese twins.

Jesse thinks about when he was a child and would light bath soap on fire to
					show Anna. He reflects that Anna is the only proof he has that he belongs in the
					family. While driving down the highway, he imagines crashing his car because he
					would be worth more dead and used as parts. He meets a homeless man named Dan. Jesse
					has a deal with Dan where he brings Dan food if Dan will watch Jesse’s things,
					including stolen acid and sawdust. Jesse goes to an abandoned warehouse and sets a
					fire. He admits he has done it before. He watches the fire from far away until he
					sees his father arrive. Jesse goes home to find Sara frantic. Kate is vomiting
					blood. Jesse drives Kate to the ER.

At the hospital, Dr. Chance tells Sara and Jesse that Kate is in the end
					stages of kidney failure. Sara asks if a transplant is possible, and Dr. Chance
					tells her that the odds are not good. Sara asks if they would do the transplant if a
					donor were available. Jesse offers his kidney, but Dr. Chance tells him it must be
					an exact match. Jesse wonders why he thought he might suddenly be worth something
					and why he thought he could save his sister when he can’t save himself. Kate tries
					to tell Jesse something, but all he can understand is “tell Anna.”

The time is 1990–1991 and Sara is pregnant with Anna. Sara knows everything
					about the baby, from the sex to the specific combination of genes that will allow
					Anna to be a donor for Kate. She admits that she has thought of Anna only in terms
					of what she will be able to do for Kate. Sara reveals that three months after chemo,
					Kate went into molecular relapse. Sara recalls the television interview she and
					Brian did. They explain why they went to a geneticist and deny wanting a “designer
					baby.” They only wanted a child who would save Kate’s life. Sara goes into labor on
					New Year’s Eve. Anna is born, and the doctors take her umbilical cord to harvest the
					cord blood. Kate begins a pre-transplant regimen of radiation and chemotherapy,
					which makes her violently ill. The doctors put her in isolation, then give her
					Anna’s cord blood.

Anna’s behavior in the section reveals both her need for attention and the
					severity of the internal conflict she feels regarding her decision to stop serving
					as Kate’s donor. She compares the turnout at her hypothetical funeral to the turnout
					she imagines at Kate’s funeral, for instance, and feels jealous that more people
					would likely go to Kate’s. These thoughts, beyond foreshadowing Anna’s death at the
					end of the novel, show that Anna craves attention. From what the reader knows at
					this point about Anna’s role in her family, the reason she wants attention appears
					to be that her parents generally neglect Anna and focus all their energy on Kate.
					The implication seems to be that Anna’s lawsuit is a cry for attention more than
					anything else. As Anna begins receiving more attention, specifically from Sara, she
					appears to be more willing to drop the lawsuit, apparent when she seems to agree
					with her mother about stopping the suit. She tells Campbell, however, that she wants
					to continue, suggesting that her motivation goes deeper than a simple desire to be
					noticed.

Sara’s pregnancy with Anna introduces the novel’s secondary ethical debate
					(the primary debate being about Anna’s rights over her own body versus her moral
					obligation to give Kate a kidney). With the aid of scientists, Sara and Brian screen
					Sara’s embryos and select the embryo that matches Kate’s genes. Then the scientists
					implant the embryo with the desired traits in Sara through in vitro fertilization.
					When Sara and Brian discuss the issue in a television interview, we learn that they
					have been receiving hate mail because people think they want a “designer baby,”
					typically meaning a child whose physical traits the parents select. Brian defends
					their decision, saying they didn’t choose the embryo based on height or IQ, just the
					traits that would keep Kate alive. In essence, however, Sara and Brian use the same
					process as they would in creating a “designer baby,” even if their intent
					differs.

Perhaps more importantly, the way Sara treats her pregnancy raises its own set
					of ethical questions. Sara admits that she only thinks of Anna in terms of how Anna
					may benefit Kate. When Sara gives birth, her first words are to tell the doctors to
					be careful with the umbilical cord, not to ask about her newborn baby. These actions
					reveal that Sara thinks of Anna more as a treatment for Kate than as an individual
					human. Though Sara does come to regard Anna as a person, she never stops thinking of
					Anna as a donor for Kate. To her, that role is part of Anna’s identity, which is why
					she cannot understand Anna’s decision not to give Kate a kidney. Paradoxically, Sara
					accuses Anna of effectively signing Kate’s death sentence by deciding not to donate
					her kidney, but Anna has that power specifically because her parents conceived her
					as a way to save Kate’s life.

The reader also gains more insight into Jesse’s character in this section.
					Jesse’s thoughts about whether he would be worth more dead and sold for parts (while
					he speeds down the highway) reveal both his self-destructive tendencies and his
					desire to sacrifice himself for someone else’s benefit. Though Jesse never names
					Kate as the person he wants to sacrifice himself for, his feelings about his
					inability to save Kate obviously inform his line of thinking. Despite his angry
					exterior, Jesse obviously cares a great deal about Kate. He doesn’t hesitate to take
					Kate to the hospital himself as she begins vomiting blood, and when Dr. Chance
					suggests that a new kidney might save Kate, Jesse offers his own. Jesse becomes
					angry when Dr. Chance tells him his genes don’t match Kate’s closely enough for him
					to be the donor, causing Jesse to wonder why he thought he might be worth something
					and why he thought he could save Kate when he can’t save himself. Clearly his
					feelings of powerlessness over Kate’s cancer have hurt his sense of self-worth,
					fueling his self-destructive tendency to take out his feelings of guilt and anger on
					himself.

Jesse began playing with fire at a young age, evident in his recollection of
					setting Jean Naté Bath Splash alight. He would show Anna the fire, expecting her to
					run away, but instead it fascinated her just as it did him. After noting that
					reaction, Jesse says Anna is the only proof he has that he belongs in the family.
					Apparently, even from a young age Jesse felt like an outsider, and he associates
					that feeling with his fascination with fire. As he aged, Jesse developed from a
					child playing with matches into a serial arsonist, indicating that his feelings were
					not only never resolved, but in fact have only grown stronger over the years. Not
					surprisingly, Jesse’s feelings and his obsession with fire have paralleled Kate’s
					cancer, which has similarly become only more severe and life-threatening over time.
					Moreover, Jesse’s relationship with fire clearly stems from his relationship with
					his parents, specifically with Brian, his father and a career firefighter. Jesse
					could have found any number of outlets for his self-destructive behavior, but the
					fact that he sets fires when his father works putting them out indicates that Jesse
					has used fire both as a way to gain his father’s attention and as a replacement for
					his father’s attention.

