The Book of Genesis opens the Hebrew Bible with the story
					of creation. God, a spirit hovering over an empty, watery void,
					creates the world by speaking into the darkness and calling into
					being light, sky, land, vegetation, and living creatures over the
					course of six days. Each day, he pauses to pronounce his works “good”
					(1:4). On the sixth
					day, God declares his intention to make a being in his “own image,”
					and he creates humankind (1:26).
					He fashions a man out of dust and forms a woman out of the man’s
					rib. God places the two people, Adam and Eve, in the idyllic garden
					of Eden, encouraging them to procreate and to enjoy the created
					world fully, and forbidding them to eat from the tree of the knowledge
					of good and evil.

In the garden, Eve encounters a crafty serpent who convinces
					her to eat the tree’s forbidden fruit, assuring her that she will
					not suffer if she does so. Eve shares the fruit with Adam, and the
					two are immediately filled with shame and remorse. While walking
					in the garden, God discovers their disobedience. After cursing the
					serpent, he turns and curses the couple. Eve, he says, will be cursed
					to suffer painful childbirth and must submit to her husband’s authority.
					Adam is cursed to toil and work the ground for food. The two are
					subsequently banished from Eden.

Sent out into the world, Adam and Eve give birth to two
					sons, Cain and Abel. Cain, a farmer, offers God a portion of his
					crops one day as a sacrifice, only to learn that God is more pleased
					when Abel, a herdsman, presents God with the fattest portion of
					his flocks. Enraged, Cain kills his brother. God exiles Cain from
					his home to wander in the land east of Eden. Adam and Eve give birth
					to a third son, Seth. Through Seth and Cain, the human race begins
					to grow.

Ten generations pass, and humankind becomes more evil.
					God begins to lament his creation and makes plans to destroy humankind
					completely. However, one man, Noah, has earned God’s favor because
					of his blameless behavior. God speaks to Noah and promises to establish
					a special covenant with Noah and his family. He instructs Noah to
					build an ark, or boat, large enough to hold Noah’s family and pairs
					of every kind of living animal while God sends a great flood to
					destroy the earth. Noah does so, his family and the animals enter
					the ark, and rain falls in a deluge for forty days, submerging the
					earth in water for more than a year. When the waters finally recede,
					God calls Noah’s family out of the ark and reaffirms his covenant
					with Noah. Upon exiting the ark, Noah’s family finds that the earth
					is moist and green again. God promises that from this new fertile
					earth will follow an equally fertile lineage for Noah and his family.
					But humankind must follow certain rules to maintain this favor:
					humans must not eat meat with blood still in it, and anyone who
					murders another human must also be killed. God vows never to destroy
					the earth again, and he designates the rainbow to be a symbol of
					his covenant.

One night, Noah becomes drunk and lies naked in his
					tent. Ham, one of Noah’s sons, sees his naked father and tells his
					brothers, Shem and Japeth. Shem and Japeth cover their father without looking
					at him. Upon waking, Noah curses Ham’s descendants, the Canaanites,
					for Ham’s indiscretion, declaring that they will serve the future
					descendants of Ham’s brothers. A detailed genealogy of the three
					brothers’ descendants is given. Many generations pass and humankind
					again becomes corrupt. Some men, having moved west to Babylon, attempt
					to assert their greatness and power by building a large tower that
					would enable them to reach the heavens. Their arrogance angers God,
					who destroys the edifice. He scatters the people across the earth
					by confusing their common language, thus forever dividing humankind
					into separate nations.

The first eleven chapters of Genesis tell an authoritative
					story about the beginnings of the world that contains many contradictions. Scholars
					believe that the account is not the work of one author, but of a
					later editor or “redactor” who collected stories from various traditional
					sources into one volume. For instance, the author of the story of
					Cain and Abel shows a knowledge of Jewish sacrificial law that only
					a later writer would possess. Also, the narrator’s introduction
					of stories with phrases such as “This is the list of the descendants
					of Adam” (5:1) or
					“These are the descendants of Noah” (6:9) suggests
					these tales existed before the current writer or redactor collected
					them into their present form.

The major thematic link of the first eleven chapters
					is the structuring of the world around a system of parallels and
					contrasts. Light breaks into the darkness, land separates water,
					and “the greater light” of the sun opposes “the lesser light” of
					the moon (1:16). A more
					complex occurrence of parallel and contrast takes place with the account
					of man’s creation. Man is not only made in the image of God, paralleling
					him, but woman, made from the man’s rib, contrasts with man. The
					Genesis writer uses the poetic device of antistrophe, or the repetition
					of a line in reverse order, to highlight the parallels and contrasts
					in the creation of man:

The antistrophe suggests that the world is logically organized around
					binary opposites, or basic opposing forces. Positive and negative,
					work and rest, and day and night are among the many binary opposites
					that the first chapters of Genesis describe. Good and evil is probably
					the most consistently explored binary opposite in the Old Testament,
					and the story of Cain and Abel initiates a lengthy analysis of the
					difference between good and evil. Cain’s deception and murder of
					Abel, as well as his evasive response to God’s questioning, describe
					his evil as inherent in his character and unmitigated by other good
					traits. God’s punishment, however, demonstrates both justice and
					mercy, establishing God as the absolute good that opposes Cain’s
					absolute evil. God exiles Cain from God’s presence, but marks Cain
					to protect him from the wrath of other people.

Images of the ground and of the earth recur in
					these chapters. In Genesis, mankind’s relationship with the ground
					is often a measure of the quality and fullness of human life. God
					creates Adam from dust, and Adam’s fate is connected to the earth
					when God curses him: 

Cain is similarly cursed to the ground, for he is exiled
					from his home and sent to wander in a strange land. The ground is
					the object of God’s rage when God sends the flood and, in some respects,
					when he destroys the Tower at Babel. However, the ground is also
					the symbol of God’s blessing to Noah, for God’s promise of fertility
					to Noah’s family mirrors the green and plentiful quality of the
					earth.

In the account of Noah, God himself uses symbols as much
					as the authors of the story. God explicitly calls the rainbow a
					“sign,” or symbol, of his covenant with humanity after the flood
					(9:12–13). God
					frequently uses physical objects to show his spiritual purposes. But
					unlike the Greek gods of Homer or other Near-Eastern deities, the
					Hebrew God is never depicted as limited or defined by these objects.
					Rather, the authors of Genesis suggest that God is telling an elaborate
					allegorical story through the act of creation and that as God manages
					the affairs of the earth, symbolic meaning is one of the primary
					ways in which he communicates with his creations.

The central purpose of these introductory chapters is
					to construct a detailed etiology, or explanation of the origins
					of the world. The author is trying to account for the way that certain
					unfavorable elements of everyday human life came into being. The
					etiological concerns are clear enough in these chapters. The writers
					and the redactors have collected stories that explain how evil and
					separate nations entered the world, why women must live in a society
					characterized by male standards, why we as humans must work to survive,
					and why our daily labor is always so hard.

