Throughout Grendel, the Shaper and his
				beautiful though fictional systems are presented as an alternative
				to the cynical, fatalistic outlook of the dragon. The Shaper represents
				the power of art and imagination to change people’s perceptions
				about themselves and the world in which they live. When the Shaper
				first arrives at Hart, he sings a version of history that depicts
				the Danes as inheritors of a heroic, righteous legacy, all the while
				downplaying the savage past that Grendel has actually witnessed.
				Although the Shaper’s story is largely fictitious, it enables the
				Danes to construct comforting, coherent value systems. The Shaper’s
				stories promote heroism, altruism, love, and beauty—all concepts
				that the Danes come to see as giving meaning to their lives. With
				these models, the Danes gain a sense that they are striving for
				something larger and more transcendent than their mundane, individual
				lives. Although Grendel is fully aware that the Shaper’s beautiful
				songs are built upon a foundation of lies and omissions, he still
				finds their power incredibly seductive, and he in turn wishes he
				had something greater to strive for and believe in.

Though the Shaper is an incredibly important and pervasive presence
				in the novel, Gardner gives him very little characterization. Though
				the Shaper is often presented as an opponent or counterpoint to
				a highly colorful character—the dragon—we can find very little to
				say about the personality of the Shaper himself. We know that he
				has a mutual though unconsummated affection for a married Danish
				woman. Furthermore, we receive scattered hints that his attachment
				to the Danes is built less on a selfless devotion to the community
				than on personal pride and a promise of monetary gratification.
				This almost negligible amount of characterization makes us consider
				the Shaper less a fully realized character than an abstract figure,
				less an individual poet than a representation of the idea of poetry.

