Chapter XI. Like Summer Tempests Came His Tears 

The Water Rat pulls the Toad to the safety of his hole, and the Toad immediately begins bragging about his adventures. The Water Rat interrupts the Toad and tells him to get cleaned up and put on fresh clothes. At first the Toad wants to talk back to the Water Rat, but when he sees his reflection, he realizes the Water Rat is right. After washing and dressing, the Toad thinks about how handsome he is. They share a breakfast, and the Toad tells the Water Rat all about his cunning and bravery. When he’s done, the Water Rat scolds him for his obsession with motor cars, for becoming a common prisoner, and for embarrassing his friends. The Toad can see that the Water Rat is right and says he will lead a peaceful life at Toad Hall. 

The Water Rat tells the Toad about what happened to Toad Hall while he was in jail. The animals took sides about what the Toad had done. The River animals defended him, but the creatures from the Wild Wood believed the Toad got what he deserved and would never be back. The Badger and the Mole moved into Toad Hall to keep it safe until the Toad’s return, but the ferrets, weasels, and stoats broke in. They beat the Mole and Badger and took possession of the manor. The Toad goes out to reclaim his estate but a ferret guarding the gate shoots at him and he runs away. The Toad then tries to use the Water Rat’s boat to sneak in through Toad Hall’s boathouse, but the stoats sink the boat by dropping a giant stone onto it as it passes under a bridge.  

The Toad and the Water Rat talk more over supper, when the Toad learns that the Badger and the Mole have been camping out, watching Toad Hall from a distance. The Mole and the Badger visit the Water Rat’s home and the Mole wants to hear all about the Toad’s adventures. Then, they argue about how to solve the problem at Toad Hall. The Badger knows about a secret tunnel to Toad Hall that the Toad’s father had told him about. The Badger had promised to keep it a secret until the Toad was in a real fix. The Badger heard from the Otter that the weasels are throwing a big party at Toad Hall the next night. No one at the party is allowed to be armed, and the tunnel will let the Toad, Badger, Water Rat, and Mole sneak past the stoats, who will act as lookouts.  

As the Water Rat and Badger prepare for the night, the Mole dresses like the washerwoman to trick the stoats. He tells them that hundreds of armed animals will be attacking later tonight during the weasels’ party. The stoats begin complaining that the weasels have the easy life inside Toad Hall, while the stoats defend it from the outside. The Toad believes the Mole has ruined everything with this story, but the Badger praises the Mole for his clever work. The Toad envies the Mole’s adventure to Toad Hall, even though he doesn’t understand the Mole’s plan. The animals then settle back and wait for the night. 

This section calls into question again the characters’ motives in occupying Toad Hall. The Badger and the Mole claim to move into the estate to keep everything tidy and to protect it from a sinister gang from the Wild Wood. However, as in Chapter VI, as the Badger and the Mole get comfortable in Toad Hall, their explanation feels more like an excuse to enjoy the house’s luxuries. Both the Badger and the Mole have comfortable homes, but they don’t spend as much time in their underground dwellings when the weather is warm. Now that summer has arrived, they could well be taking advantage of the Toad’s absence by moving into his manor. This suggests that they share something with the predators from the Wild Wood. When the Water Rat speaks about the Badger, his tone is wary, showing that he doesn’t entirely trust him. The Mole’s allegiances change swiftly. He spent last summer living at the Water Rat’s, but as soon as better housing is available at Toad Hall, he moves right in. While it is reassuring to see them return to the Water Rat’s den and defend the Toad, this chapter calls their true natures into question. 

The Toad continues to prove himself unlikeable, unreliable, and unworthy of his friends that their continued defense of him reveals their altruism. After the Water Rat rescues the Toad from the rushing river, the Toad shows no gratitude. Instead, he ignores the fact that the Water Rat likely saved his life, and instead tells tall tales about his numerous close calls. He is incapable of self-reflection and cannot see how his stories show him in a bad light. Through all his misfortune, the Toad’s impulsive nature is as strong as ever, and he wants to take on every challenge immediately, with no forethought. He also views every moment as a potential challenge, so he cannot break his harmful patterns of behavior. A chance to boast about his bravery, an opportunity to fill his stomach, or an ill-conceived plan to retake his property are all the same to the Toad. Each is a chance to prove that he is better than his peers.  

The Badger and the Mole are very different creatures, but they have quite a lot in common. The Badger is a predator who lives in the Wild Wood and shuns society, while the Mole is prey who scurries along the riverbank with the help of his friends. Both of them appreciate the coziness of living underground and they are quick to help a friend in need, but most importantly, they are strategic thinkers. Unlike the Water Rat or the Toad, who believe in the virtues of a direct attack, the Badger understands the value of well-planned surprise. The Mole does his own strategic planning, although his approach is more daring. By teasing the stoat sentinels, he creates dissatisfaction among the creatures in Toad Hall, leading them to fight with each other. This ensures that when the Badger’s sneak attack unfolds, the stoats will be unwilling to help the weasels. Neither the Water Rat nor the Toad has the foresight to think strategically, but the Badger finds in the Mole a worthy, if small, ally. 

The Toad doesn’t understand or appreciate how his thoughtless behavior affects his friends and community. The Water Rat and Badger try to help him realize the effects of his actions, but they cannot get through to the Toad. The Toad believes himself to be an independent creature with property, money, and a mind that belong to him alone. However, the novel continually shows that the characters are dependent upon one another. The Toad holds a special position in society, that of the landed gentleman. When he behaves badly, he casts the entire society in a negative light. The creatures of the Wild Wood make a valid point that the Toad’s actions mean he does not deserve to keep Toad Hall. It is to his friends’ credit that they continue to defend him and reason with him. They would have a right, and perhaps even an obligation, to ostracize him if he continues his bad behavior. 

