Rodolphe has decided not to elope with Emma. The sexual
					pleasure she provides, he decides, will not be enough to offset
					the inconvenience and drain of being constantly in her company.
					As he contemplates the best way of telling her, he reminisces about
					his former mistresses. He then writes Emma a letter in which he
					says that because he loves her so much, he must break off their
					affair, because all he can offer her is pain. His letter is a fabrication,
					but he feels it will satisfy Emma and minimize the inconvenience
					to him of ending the affair. He has the letter delivered to Emma
					concealed at the bottom of a basket of apricots.

	When Emma receives the letter, she is devastated. Reading
					the letter in the attic, she contemplates throwing herself out the
					window, but stops when she hears Charles calling her. In her agitated state,
					she leaves the letter there, forgetting to conceal it. That night, as
					Charles eats the apricots Rodolphe has sent, Emma sees Rodolphe’s
					carriage drive by on its way out of town, and she faints. She declares
					that she wants to see no one, not even her daughter. She develops
					a high fever and remains close to death for the next month and a
					half. Charles calls in doctors from all over the region, but none of
					them can cure her. By October, however, Emma begins to recover her
					health.

Charles has a number of worries. Emma’s ill health terrifies
					him, and his financial situation is becoming increasingly dire.
					The doctors are very expensive, and when Lheureux presents him with
					a list of Emma’s debts, Charles is forced to borrow the money from
					Lheureux at very high interest in order to pay them off. Meanwhile, Emma,
					who believes she has had a religious epiphany during her illness,
					rediscovers the Catholic fervor of her youth. She prays devoutly
					and is kinder to both Charles and Berthe. But her religion disappoints
					her. Although she is as passionately devoted to religious practice
					as she once was to Rodolphe, she finds it offers her none of the
					same ecstasies. She maintains her practice and kind demeanor, however,
					becoming friendly with the villagers, including Justin, who by now
					is completely in love with her. Other frequent visitors are the tax
					collector, Binet, who offers advice on uncorking cider bottles, and
					Homais, who suggests that Charles take Emma to the opera in Rouen.
					The priest and the pharmacist argue over whether or not the theater
					is moral—Bournisien claiming that it is irreligious and Homais defending
					it. Eventually, thinking it will benefit Emma’s health, Charles
					decides to take her to the opera.

At the opera, Emma finds herself again embarrassed by
					Charles’s unsophisticated behavior, preoccupied with the desire
					to seem cosmopolitan and aristocratic. But she enjoys the opera
					a great deal; it reminds her of the romantic novels of her youth
					and makes her think about events in her own life. At intermission,
					she is stunned to hear that Leon is in the crowd. She, Charles,
					and Leon go to a café. Charles and Leon talk, and Emma is highly
					impressed by the sophistication Leon has acquired since moving to
					Paris. Leon begins to ridicule the opera but when he learns that
					Emma might stay in Rouen in order to see the second half, he praises
					it rapturously. Charles suggests that Emma stay the next day to
					see the rest of the opera while he returns to Yonville.

Throughout the novel, Emma undergoes ethical development
					cyclically. She tends to switch from romantic indulgence to dissatisfaction,
					misery, and illness to moral resolve, and then begins the cycle again
					with a new romantic indulgence. This cycle is evident in her relationship
					with Rodolphe. After Rodolphe cuts off their affair, she becomes
					religious. Her insincere piety gives way to romantic yearnings,
					and when she meets Leon at the opera, she is ready to renew their
					fledgling romance. This cycle, however, cannot last forever, and
					when she receives Rodolphe’s letter, her suicidal thoughts darkly
					foreshadow her future. Another element of foreshadowing in this
					scene is never fully realized, however. Emma discards Rodolphe’s
					note carelessly unconcealed in the attic, but trustworthy Charles
					never suspects her infidelities, and, even when he later finds the
					note, he naively reckons it refers to platonic friendship.

	Although this emotional cycle may seem like a reason
					to condemn Emma, her heartbreak and subsequent illness are in some ways
					a product of the society in which she lives. Rodolphe himself blames
					the end of their affair on “fate,” but Rodolphe does have control
					over the end of the love affair. As a wealthy man, he has much more
					power than Emma. As a woman with no way to support herself, Emma
					can’t gain freedom by leaving Charles, nor does she have the means
					to pursue Rodolphe. Furthermore, Rodolphe’s life of ease, combined
					with his status as a man, allows him great sexual liberty. He has
					had so many lovers that he is detached and cold. As a result, he
					can abandon Emma with no great feelings of regret.

	The scene in which Rodolphe writes his letter to Emma
					exemplifies Flaubert’s ironic combination of humor and pity. The
					text of the letter itself is ridiculous, full of high sentiment
					and exclamation points. In a sense, it is exactly the sort of letter
					that the maudlin Emma might wish for. But Flaubert emphasizes the
					insincerity of the words by depicting Rodolphe’s thoughts as he
					composes the letter. For example, when Rodolphe writes, “fate is
					to blame!” he thinks, “that’s a word that always helps.” By contrasting
					self--congratulatory comments like this one with the overblown romanticism
					of the letter itself, Flaubert heightens the insincerity of Rodolphe’s
					sentiments. At the same time, he points out how deceptive the written
					word can be, which reflects not only on Rodolphe, but on Flaubert
					himself in his role as a writer.

	Flaubert’s awareness of the power of written language
					to deceive makes him cautious not to imbue his descriptions with
					too much heavy-handed commentary. As he describes Emma’s religious
					ardor, he writes almost like a reporter, carefully describing actions
					without venturing any comments on them. But Flaubert makes his thoughts understood
					even while maintaining an apparently objective tone. By using the
					technique of juxtaposition—that is, by putting Rodolphe’s thoughts
					beside his words—Flaubert conveys the character’s malice and insincerity.
					Elsewhere he deploys words ironically in unexpected contexts to
					achieve similarly subtle effects. In the statement, “[Emma] fancied
					herself seized with the finest Catholic melancholy,” the lighthearted
					words “fancied herself” undermine the seriousness of Emma’s emotions,
					making it clear that Flaubert judges his heroine’s sentiments to
					be somewhat ridiculous. He uses a similar technique later, to let
					us know that the opera Emma likes so much is really a mediocre production.
					He writes, “Lucie bravely attacked her cavatina in G major,” and
					with this simple phrase we realize that the singer is no great soprano,
					but just a chorus girl trying to sing difficult opera.

