Though the court rolls and manorial records of Cecilia’s time offer a
				wealth of information about her actions, there is virtually no documentation
				that offers an accurate glimpse into Cecilia’s thoughts and feelings. We can
				assume, however, that Cecilia was a survivor and a striver and that she likely
				possessed characteristics that promoted the prosperity she enjoyed. At the core
				of Cecilia was her hardiness. Blessed with good health and a family that
				nurtured and provided for her into adulthood, Cecilia demonstrated a resilience
				that was the hallmark of peasant life. From a young age, she likely helped with
				chores, including watching animals, supervising her younger sister, cooking,
				gardening, brewing ales, tying bundles of grain at harvest, and foraging for
				nuts and berries. As she grew older and had several acres of land to manage, she
				probably did some of the harder work that men did, which indicates both
				hardiness and independence. Further evidence of both her hardiness and
				independence rests in Cecilia’s choice of lifestyle. A
				singlewoman her entire life, Cecilia eschewed the economic
				security that marriage typically guaranteed in favor of living on her own.

In order to succeed as Cecilia did, she had to be flexible, intelligent,
				and even ruthless. Because she was a woman and could not reap the benefits of
				being an officer, Cecilia probably relied on her network of family and friends
				to protect her interests at court. With so much land, she had much at stake, and
				she walked a fine line between garnering either respect or resentment from her
				poorer peasant neighbors. This balance required a shrewdness that Cecilia likely
				employed in the management of her lands as well as in her social relationships.
				Perhaps inherent in Cecilia’s shrewdness was a willingness to get ahead at the
				expense of others in the community. Bennett notes several instances of Cecilia’s
				neighbors accusing her of stealing grain from them, an act that seems unusual
				and risky given Cecilia’s relative affluence. Additionally, Cecilia’s seminal
				land acquisitions occurred during the Great Famine, when lands could be
				purchased at a bargain, which suggests that she was profiteering. In this light,
				Cecilia’s surname Penifader—derived from Pennyfather, or
				pennypincher—was perhaps well-deserved.

The most interesting mysteries about Cecilia are those that surface in the
				records just enough to titillate our curiosity before receding into darkness and
				uncertainty. One such aspect is Cecilia’s appearance. Beside the court record
				detailing Cecilia’s will and last testament, there is a scribble of a tall,
				thin, curly-haired, pointy-nosed woman that may very well be the clerk’s
				rendition of the deceased Cecilia, drawn from memory. The most apparent question
				about Cecilia, though, is why she decided not to marry, a somewhat unusual life
				choice in the Middle Ages. Bennett offers a practical explanation: marrying
				would have required Cecilia to cede herself and all her lands to her husband, a
				concession she may have been unwilling to make. But there are other explanations
				as well. Cecilia came of age during the Great Famine and certainly saw many
				acquaintances die. While highly improbable, it is not implausible that the love
				of Cecilia’s life numbered among the dead. Perhaps slightly more probable,
				Cecilia may have had a lover who was her social inferior and could not marry him
				for fear of losing her standing in the community. Bennett wonders what
				relationship Cecilia had to Robert Malin, to whom she bequeathed a third of all
				of her landholdings. Once again, it is improbable but not implausible that
				Cecilia may have had an intimate relationship with Malin.

