
					In
					The Blind Assassin,
					the man and the woman continue to meet. He writes pulp science fiction novels and often finds his creativity stifled by the types of plots he must produce. He is increasingly dependent on the woman to supply him with money and small necessities. He reminisces about the less emotionally complicated relationships he has had with women in the past.
				

After making love, the woman urges the man to return to the Zycron story. The assassin decides that he will have sex with the sacrificial maiden before he kills her and disguises himself in her clothes. However, due to confusion around timing, the courtier who was supposed to have sex with her has not yet arrived, so she assumes that the assassin is the appointed courtier. With both of them confused about what is happening, they begin to fall in love. The woman notes that she is surprised by the turn the story has taken.

A newspaper article reports that Laura Chase has been located after rumors she had run away. The article states that there was simply a mix up and she had been safely with friends the whole time.

The woman reflects on the burden created by the secrecy of her affair but also knows that she cannot give up the relationship with the man. She often feels vulnerable and exposed as an obviously wealthy woman venturing into seedy neighborhoods in order to meet with him.

The man resumes the story. The assassin is now torn because of his feelings for the young maiden. He realizes that the courtier has not yet arrived, and he can hear the other man approaching the chamber. Thinking quickly, the assassin takes the body of a handmaiden whom he had killed when he arrived, puts the body in the bed, and then hides himself and the maiden. While the courtier is distracted with the body of whom he believes to be the maiden, the two sneak out and flee the city. Exhausted, they fall asleep and wake up surrounded by the People of Joy. The assassin convinces them that they are divine messengers.

A society column describes a lavish costume ball which was organized by Winifred and which Iris also attended.

The man is living in increasingly squalid conditions and wonders why the woman continues to come and see him. He continues to write his science fiction novels, musing on how he once had greater ambitions for himself.


					This section of the novel delves deeper into the psychology of the unnamed man in
					The Blind Assassin
					and underscores the theme that self-sacrifice does not always pay off. By now, readers can safely assume that this character is largely based on Alex Thomas, but it is also important to remember that the character in
					The Blind Assassin
					is a creation of the woman who wrote the novel. Thus, the thoughts and feelings of the unnamed man represent what she imagined Alex might have experienced during their relationship, not necessarily what he
					did
					experience. The sections representing the man’s perspective show that he is significantly more sensitive than he sometimes appears in the interactions he has with the woman. While he might be cruel to her face, he feels great tenderness and desire for her in private. He also feels a sense of regret and melancholy about his life. The man once had grand dreams, and by trying to live up to his principles, he has resigned himself to a lonely and squalid life. The man’s narrative shows that self-sacrifice and ideals do not always benefit the person who sacrifices.
				

As this section explores the man’s career as a writer, it offers another window into the creative process and how those who are creative often suffer greatly. Creativity is often assumed to equate with freedom, but the man’s economic circumstances stifle the way he wants to use his talents. He does not really like writing the pulp science fiction stories, but they are the only way he can pay his bills while still maintaining secrecy. In contrast, his true creativity emerges when he tells stories to the woman because he can combine his interest in alternate worlds with critiques about class. He even includes elements of a love story.

Within the Zycron narrative, the love story between the assassin and the maiden mirrors the relationship between the man and the woman. The assassin has been scarred by his past and the class position he was born into. He has had to resort to a life of crime. Similarly, the man (and, by extension, Alex Thomas) was unlucky to be born in a time when his principles and ideals effectively make him an enemy of the state. He has to hide out and sneak around even though he has never done anything wrong. The maiden has been harmed and exploited by others for their own purposes, like Iris and also Laura. The assassin initially has sinister intentions toward the maiden and wants to use her for his own pleasure. However, the force of the chemistry between them puts them both in tricky situations. This aspect of the Zycron storyline likely reflects part of how the relationship between the man and the woman came about.

