“My karma ran over my dogma.”

Bridget tries to write to Carmen so that she can send
					her the Pants, but she has a hard time figuring out what to say.
					While she sits on her cabin porch, Eric comes over to talk, pretending
					nothing happened between them. Bridget doesn’t want to pretend,
					but Eric grows awkward. He says what happened was his fault, and
					he apologizes, which angers Bridget. She finally writes to Carmen,
					saying only that she’s confused.

Tibby and Bailey interview Carmen for the documentary.
					Carmen tells Bailey she and Tibby had an argument, but Bailey says
					it doesn’t matter since they love each other. Carmen is taken aback when
					Bailey asks direct questions about Albert and the upcoming wedding.
					Carmen denies being angry at Albert, then starts sobbing. Bailey
					tells her it’s okay to be angry.

One day, when Tibby’s shift ends, Bailey is nowhere in
					sight. Tibby is alarmed, not minding anymore that Bailey spends
					so much time with her. She rides her bike to Bailey’s house, which
					is empty, but a neighbor tells her the family is at the hospital.
					Tibby hurries over, reassuring herself that Bailey is fine. At the
					hospital, however, Mrs. Graffman tells Tibby how sick Bailey is.
					The cancer keeps coming back. Bailey’s parents decided to let her
					live normally for a few months, but now Bailey has an infection
					and things don’t look hopeful. Mrs. Graffman tearfully thanks Tibby
					for being Bailey’s friend. Tibby, overcome with emotion, quickly
					leaves.

“You can take a road that gets you to
						the stars. I can take a road that will see me through.”

Lena returns to the olive grove near the pond at the beginning
					of August. She loses herself in her painting. When she’s done, she decides
					to give the painting to Kostos as an apology.

Tibby doesn’t go to work because she hates knowing that
					Bailey won’t be meeting her afterward. She tries to play with Mimi,
					but when she taps on Mimi’s box, Mimi doesn’t move. She lifts Mimi
					up and realizes she’s dead. Unwilling to admit this fact, Tibby
					puts Mimi in a paper bag and puts the bag in the freezer, sure that
					she’ll be able to revive Mimi someday when science comes up with
					a method. She tries to write to her friends, but she gives up.

Lena writes to Carmen about how she and her grandfather
					have eaten breakfast together in silence all summer. She vows to
					learn a little Greek so they can talk before the summer ends.

Carmen, worn out from crying, tells Christina she’s mad
					at Albert. She tells Christina she doesn’t know why it’s easier
					to be mad at her than at Albert, and Christina suggests that Carmen
					gets angry at people she trusts. Christina reminds her how difficult
					it was when Albert moved after the divorce.

Tibby plans to watch TV all night. Bailey calls her, but
					she ignores it, trying not to hear Bailey’s message asking Tibby
					to call.

On the day of the big game against Los Cocos, Bridget
					has no energy. When she puts on her cleats, she realizes she’s lost
					weight. On the field, she can’t muster up any drive, which confuses
					her team and gives Los Cocos the advantage. Molly yells at her,
					and Bridget yells back, then abandons the game.

As the girls’ lives get more complicated, they have trouble
					writing to one another, revealing that even close friendships sometimes
					have limitations. Although the girls have made a vow to write to
					one another regularly, as the summer progresses they find that the
					letter-writing becomes more difficult. Having been friends their
					whole lives, they have never kept secrets or withheld information
					from one another, and they’ve gone through the most important things together
					up until that summer. Now, apart, they are facing challenges on
					their own, and the task of updating one another proves daunting.
					Tibby, for example, can’t write to her friends about Bailey’s admittance
					to the hospital, and Bridget avoids mentioning sex when she writes
					to Carmen. Describing events and daily experiences is difficult
					when those events include a child’s sickness and an uncomfortable
					sexual encounter. But what’s more difficult is trying to describe
					the way they feel about these events. Bridget and Tibby cannot articulate
					to themselves how they feel, so writing letters and trying to explain
					these confusing feelings to others seems next to impossible. In
					one another’s absence, the girls are forced to handle big changes
					and confusions on their own.

Tibby’s unwillingness to admit that Mimi is dead reveals
					her unwillingness to acknowledge that Bailey is extremely sick and
					may even die. Mimi is unquestionably dead when Tibby lifts her from
					her cage. Part of Tibby acknowledges this fact, and she knows she
					can’t leave Mimi in her box or she’ll start to smell. But another
					part of Tibby can’t accept that death is permanent. By putting Mimi
					in the freezer so she can be revived at a later date, Tibby is ignoring
					reality, just as she does when Bailey gets very sick. Although Tibby
					has known all along that Bailey has leukemia, Bailey has always
					seemed vibrant, even healthy. Bailey’s rapid-fire banter, quick
					wit, and enthusiasm for the documentary made it easy for Tibby to
					forget that Bailey has cancer. When Tibby sees Mrs. Graffman at
					the hospital, however, she can’t ignore it anymore. But instead
					of facing it head-on, Tibby shuts down. She stays home from work
					to stop from thinking about Bailey’s daily appearance, and she ignores
					Bailey’s phone calls. Just as Tibby denied Mimi’s death by putting
					her in the freezer, she denies Bailey’s sickness by pretending it
					isn’t happening.

When Bridget finally leaves her cabin, she has changed
					into an entirely different Bridget, someone no one has seen before.
					Usually ravenous all the time, eating huge quantities of food eagerly,
					Bridget has now lost weight from not eating and lying in bed all
					day. Usually bursting with energy, Bridget now slogs to the soccer
					game, unable to muster any enthusiasm even though this is the championship match.
					Her teammates are accustomed to Bridget being the team leader, the
					one who sets the pace of the game. They don’t recognize this listless
					new girl, and the game falls apart. Uncharacteristically, Bridget
					doesn’t seem to care. Until now, she has always been competitive,
					sometimes aggressively so, but now she walks away from the game.
					A light switch has gone off, and Bridget, the team star, lively
					friend, and active camper, is only a dim shadow of the person she
					had been before.

