Rawdon, Becky, and their son Rawdy live shockingly well in Paris considering that they have no income. They get by on readily offered credit, while Rawdon, skilled at billiards and cards, earns extra money gambling. Rawdon also has left the army, and Becky realizes that they need a steadier source of income. When they get the news that Miss Crawley lies on her deathbed, Becky sends Rawdon to London, but he owes so much money there that he goes to Belgium instead. Once Miss Crawley dies, the family publicly anticipates an inheritance. Becky journeys to England with no intention of repaying her French creditors. She negotiates with Rawdon’s English creditors to accept one-tenth of what he owes them. Then the Crawleys return to London.

Rawdon and Becky capitalize on his name and connections to patronize Miss Crawley’s tradesmen, including renting a house from her former butler, whom they will ruin through nonpayment. Rawdon and Becky act as if they have scads of money. Becky makes new friends but is snubbed by the nobility, which angers Rawdon. Becky counsels patience because she wants to reconcile with the family. When Sir Pitt dies, Rawdon graciously accepts his small inheritance and writes a congratulatory letter to Pitt and Lady Jane. Becky hopes that Lady Jane will introduce her into society.

The men whom Becky spends time with at her house, gambling with Rawdon, are high-ranking but lewd. Becky ignores her son Rawdy, leaving him to the care of maids, and hires a companion, or “sheepdog,” to protect her reputation. Rawdon, meanwhile, loves to spend time with his son. One day they meet a military friend in the park. He is talking with an older gentleman accompanied by a boy about Rawdy’s age. It’s Mr. Sedley and his grandson, Georgy.

The narrator updates the reader on the Sedleys. Jos returns to India but supports his parents because Mr. Sedley never makes money in any of the businesses he launches. Amelia, an overprotective mother, remains with her parents. After her mother administers a tonic to the baby that the doctor said was poisonous, Amelia snaps at Mrs. Sedley, causing an irrevocable coolness to form between them. Amelia spends much of her time taking care of Georgy and talking to him about his father.

Amelia rejects a marriage proposal and remains devoted to her dead husband. She keeps herself busy teaching Georgy and writing her father’s correspondence. She lives off her pension and interest on her funds. Dobbin, as Georgy’s guardian, manages her funds, but Mr. Sedley thinks George should have left more money. He accuses Dobbin of cheating on Amelia when, in fact, Amelia’s fund comes from Dobbin’s own money. Amelia never realizes how much she owes Dobbin. She writes him several times a year about Georgy, and Dobbin sends presents. Mrs. Sedley knows that Dobbin loves Amelia.

Georgy grows up to be a boy much like his father in personality. Dobbin’s sisters sometimes visit and take Amelia and Georgy for a drive. One day they tell her that Dobbin is to marry Mrs. O’Dowd’s sister-in-law. Amelia gets teary but claims she is happy.

Chapters XXXVI through XXXVIII take up the next half-decade in the lives of Amelia, Rawdon, and Becky. The three mostly continue down the same paths they were on before their time in Belgium. Even in George’s death, Amelia remains devoted to him but transfers the bulk of her all-encompassing, all-consuming love to their son, to the boy’s detriment. Georgy resembles his father in looks, and because his entire family spoils him, he develops a haughty nature like his father. Mr. Sedley shows he is a poor judge of character. He has completely reversed himself on George Osborne and now talks of his son-in-law in glowing terms. This change seems based solely on the fact that George died a war hero. Further, Mr. Sedley is so blind to the goodness of Dobbin that he accuses him of stealing money from Amelia—as if Dobbin has not done everything he can, financially and emotionally, to help Amelia. In sharp contrast to Mr. Sedley is his wife, who easily discerns that Dobbin is in love with Amelia. If Amelia and her mother still had a close relationship, Mrs. Sedley might be able to influence Amelia to leave behind her memories of George for a future with Dobbin.

Becky and Rawdon use their charm and connections to live on credit in Paris and England, never caring about the lives they destroy as they pursue the lifestyle they feel they deserve by virtue of Rawdon’s birth. Becky flirts more knowingly and intentionally with Lord Steyne than readers have previously seen. The conversation between the two is risqué and provocative. Becky’s discussion of the “sheepdog” shows that she understands she is about to embark on a relationship that could damage her reputation unless she takes steps to ensure her good name. Becky also wants to get Rawdon out of the way so she can spend her time with Lord Steyne. She is now less tolerant of Rawdon than ever before. While Becky never truly loved her husband, she seemed genuinely fond of him. However, once back in England, Becky’s attitude toward Rawdon turns dismissive. In England, he is known as “Mrs. Crawley’s husband,” and this name aptly reflects that Becky holds all the power in their relationship. She functions as an independent woman despite being married, and readers may think it is likely that her relationship with Rawdon will not last long.

One of the few characters who show some character development is Rawdon. In some ways, he is the same—he focuses on what benefits himself and his family and ignores the harm he does anyone else, such as his creditors. However, Rawdon cares enough about his child to form a close relationship with the boy. He chooses a far different path than Becky, who pretends the child doesn’t exist. In this aspect, Rawdon deviates from the model he has experienced his entire life. His father, Sir Pitt, paid little attention to him or his brother or his two half-sisters. Rawdon somehow figures out how to be a caring, present father to his child.

The fact that Becky and Amelia both have sons the same age provides opportunities to explore their approaches to motherhood. In effect, Becky has no approach since she ignores Rawdy. Because the child doesn’t serve her ambitions and could even detract from her attractiveness to Lord Steyne, he has no useful purpose. Amelia shows herself to be a poor mother as well. While she dotes on Georgy, her love is excessive. She makes Georgy too important to her well-being and thus to himself. Amelia risks ruining Georgy with all this attention and turning him into a self-centered man, just like his father.

