After the execution, Vernon Harvey tells reporters that
					Robert died too easily. Elizabeth Harvey says Robert was unrepentant,
					and her fourteen-year-old daughter says that Robert’s execution
					was the best Christmas present. Prejean tells the reporters that
					Robert’s execution accomplished nothing, and that he did show remorse.

The next day, ABC Evening News interviews Prejean. Her
					opinion about the death penalty is contrasted against the Harveys’
					and that of syndicated columnist George Will. Vernon Harvey says
					he wishes every victim could see his or her killer executed. Prejean
					says she believes that if people could witness executions, they
					would see what a horrible and brutal act it is. The death penalty
					is surrounded with euphemisms that pretend torture and killing are
					dignified, and that mob vengeance is noble, she says.

When public executions were public events, Prejean says,
					the cruelty of the punishment was at least honest and apparent.
					She references a study that was done in the United States that found twenty-three
					people innocent after they were executed. In England, the hanging
					of an innocent man led to a moratorium and eventual abolition of
					the death penalty, but in the United States, the death penalty is
					still accepted.

At Robert’s funeral, his mother and stepbrothers huddle
					close together. His mother faints while staring into the casket.
					After the burial, they return to Elizabeth’s house and look at old
					pictures of Robert.

Prejean says that after Robert’s execution, she decided
					to avoid the Harveys, but two years later they attended a seminar
					organized by Prejean’s abolition group and invited her over. The
					Harveys help other victims’ families by informing them of their
					rights, which they themselves never knew. They tell Prejean how
					poorly the D.A. and the police treated them after their daughter’s
					murder, and how their friends stayed away from them. Prejean tells
					them that Robert’s last words were sincere. Vernon, unable to let
					go of his grief, begins to cry.

After a weeklong abolition march, Prejean runs into the
					Harveys, who are staging a counter demonstration. Elizabeth Harvey
					speaks to the crowd, asking people to write letters protesting Congress’s plan
					to cut victims’ assistance funds. They meet again outside of another
					execution, where the Harveys defend Prejean against their pro death
					penalty friends. Vernon invites Prejean to a Parents of Murdered
					Children’s Meeting. She relays some of the tragic stories she hears
					at the meeting. She is amazed by how many people feel victimized
					by the D.A. and police. She organizes a victims’ families’ assistance
					program in the inner city with the assistance of local churches
					and federal funds and advocates for a reform that would allow for
					victim restitution and addresses the rise of violent crime. In August
					1988, the victim assistance group is established. Prejean takes
					the new program director, Dianne Kidner, to visit the Harveys to
					seek their assistance and opinions.

In July 1989, Vernon Harvey has a heart attack. Prejean
					visits him in the hospital, and during their playful debate over
					the death penalty, she sees the life returning to him. Two years
					later, Prejean attends a meeting of Survive, the victims’ families
					assistance program she helped found. Most of the parents are poor,
					black women who have lost their sons to gun violence. Prejean discusses
					the drastically low number of prosecutions in murders in which the
					victim is black.

Prejean ends her story with Lloyd LeBlanc, whom she has
					kept in touch with throughout the years. One day, Lloyd, Prejean,
					and her brother meet for a prayer session at a small church. Prejean
					says that Lloyd prays not only for his son, but for Patrick and
					his family. Even as he stared at his son’s body, Lloyd says, he
					forgave the men who murdered him.

As Prejean’s narrative draws to a close, the focus switches
					from the men on death row to the victims of murder. The last chapter
					of Dead Man Walking revisits the two families affected
					by the murders. The perspective of Lloyd LeBlanc and Vernon Harvey
					could not be more different, yet each is an understandable response
					to tragedy. Vernon Harvey’s rage at Robert has not subsided over
					the years. Even as he lies in a hospital bed, his thoughts turn
					to capital punishment and his daughter’s murderer. His anger is
					what sustains him. Advocating for the death penalty and assisting
					victims’ families keeps him going in the face of overwhelming grief.
					Vernon’s grief, however, is also self-destructive. His anger compels
					him to fight, but it’s clear that it does nothing to comfort him.
					He questions the value of life because for him, there is little
					pleasure left in the world. There is only anger and grief.

In sharp contrast to Vernon Harvey is Lloyd LeBlanc. Patrick’s execution
					has made him realize that capital punishment only causes more grief.
					Whereas anger sustains Vernon Harvey, Lloyd LeBlanc has made his
					way to forgiveness and reconciliation. His grief over his son’s
					death remains, but the rage is gone. He has forgiven his son’s murderer,
					and not only because Patrick asked for that forgiveness before he
					died, but because he believed in forgiveness as an article of faith.

Prejean has already argued that capital punishment is
					arbitrary and unjust, and now she adds that the criminal justice
					system mistreats not only criminals, but also victims. What lies
					at the heart of the mistreatment is the lack of value placed on
					the lives of minorities by state officials. The injustice of the
					criminal justice system goes both ways, especially for the poor
					and black. By pointing out yet another serious flaw in the judicial
					system, Prejean strengthens her argument for serious reform. Everything
					must be changed, from the way criminals are treated and prosecuted
					to the respect shown to victims’ families. Before we can do that,
					however, we need to take an honest look at the system and acknowledge
					its errors. The euphemisms that Prejean notes, which are so pervasive
					in the system, must be dispensed with: killing, whether it is done
					by hanging or by lethal injection, must be called by its name. In
					addition, we must acknowledge that capital punishment does not deter
					crime, and that race and class play far too great a role in determining
					not only who lives and who dies, but who is prosecuted in the first
					place.

