Dinah feels terribly lonely with Re-mose away at school.
					She makes a home for herself in the garden shed and toils among
					the flowers and fruit to earn her keep. Re-mose does well at school
					and is kept away from home with trips to visit his friends’ families.
					Time passes, and Dinah and Meryt become close friends. They spend
					hours together talking and laughing, discussing their experiences
					as midwives. Meryt’s husband has long been dead, and she has two adopted
					sons who lived on the west bank of the river. Though Dinah refuses
					to attend any births with her, she teaches Meryt all she knows of
					herbs and tricks for bringing healthy babies into the world. 

Four years after Re-mose leaves, Dinah is summoned to
					attend a difficult birth with Meryt. Though the mother dies, Dinah
					saves one of the two babies. From then on various houses in Thebes
					call upon Dinah to attend births. She and Meryt work together and
					accumulate gifts of jewelry and linens. One day, they go to the
					market to buy a box to hold Dinah’s new belongings. There they meet
					a carpenter named Benia, who has an open face and cannot take his
					eyes off of Dinah. He offers her a beautiful box. Meryt tells him
					to bring the box to Nakht-re’s home the next day, since he is moving
					shortly to the Valley of Kings. Dinah feels something in his gaze
					but says nothing. They arrive home to an uproar, for Re-mose has
					returned. 

Dinah has not seen Re-mose in five years, and in that
					time he has grown into a young man. Their meeting feels forced,
					since he is a prince of Egypt and she merely his nurse. Re-mose
					has been asked to learn the duties of a vizier. A great banquet
					is held that night in his honor, and a veiled singer appears with
					the band. She sings a song of lost love that sounds familiar to
					Dinah. After the festivities die down, she makes her way over to
					the band and addresses the singer by her name. The singer turns
					out to be Werenro, the messenger of her grandmother with the red
					hair who was thought to have been murdered years before. 

Werenro lifts her veil and shows Dinah how her face is
					torn and scarred, with her nose broken and her eyes gouged out.
					Werenro relates her story to Dinah. While leaving Tyre to return
					to Mamre, she was attacked by the side of the road by three Canaanite
					men. They raped her, beat her, and left her for dead. A boy found
					her and called for his mother, who took her in and healed her. Rather
					than return to Mamre as a slave, Werenro decided to let everyone
					think she was murdered and placed sheep’s bones along the road with locks
					of her hair before joining a caravan of singers. Dinah tells her story,
					relieved to at last recount what has happened to her. She begins
					to remember the woman she was as she tells her story. Werenro declares
					that she might as well be dead, but Dinah still has life in her
					yet. 

Dinah confronts her memories when she reclaims her role
					as a midwife and encounters Werenro at Re-mose’s feast. Forced back
					into the practice and life of a midwife, she reconnects with her
					memories of Rachel, Inna, and the powerful world of women in which
					she was raised. When Dinah helps to deliver the twins and succeeds
					where Meryt could not, she remembers her own skill and usefulness.
					The feeling of being useful again brings tremendous relief after
					years of solitude and lethargy in the garden. She knows from her
					upbringing that such a gift is not to be taken lightly. Her presence
					of mind during her own birthing experience stands as proof that
					Dinah’s abilities as a midwife are impressive. Though she has no
					mothers or daughters to serve, there are other women who need her.
					By resuming the life of a midwife, Dinah reclaims a sense of self
					that she thought that she had lost.

Dinah reclaims her own history when she reunites with
					Werenro and hears her terrible story. Werenro offers Dinah the third
					prophecy of her life, and the only one of the three that has any
					effect on Dinah’s actions. Zilpah’s prophecy of finding happiness
					near a river rings false, and while Rebecca’s prophecy of unspeakable
					grief came true, Dinah never acknowledges the prediction again.
					In contrast, Werenro’s words shoot directly to Dinah’s heart. Dinah
					can finally relate her sorrow after hearing the torment that Werenro
					endured and understanding how Werenro equates her current existence
					with a living death. Relief floods her body as she unburdens her
					secrets to Werenro and cries on her shoulder. Werenro tells her
					that her grief shines from her heart but that the flame of love
					still burns strong, explaining that Dinah’s story is not yet finished.
					Dinah feels greatly affected by unloading her tragic story, while
					Werenro’s declaration that she must live out her destiny without
					her family moves her greatly. At long last, she weeps for the memories
					of her mothers and feels some relief.

The brief reappearance of Re-mose, now nearly an adult,
					further strengthens Dinah’s resolve to take action in her life.
					She sees in his mature face how many years she has spent hiding
					in her garden and realizes that she must face her life. Re-mose
					has grown up and learned the ways of a vizier, which draws attention
					to Dinah’s own intertia. Her relationship with Re-nefer, which has
					always been cordial, has become nearly nonexistent. Dinah comes
					and goes from her home in the garden shed and feels no attachment
					to anyone other than Meryt. Since she has no family in Thebes, there
					is no reason to call it home. She realizes that others like Werenro
					have lived through suffering—and found the strength to go on with
					their lives. Dinah is no longer bound to her son’s life, for he
					will not be coming home to see his mother again, so she must find
					her own way.

