The opening of the first chapter describes the history
					of Isle des Chevaliers since the laborers appeared 300 years
					ago. When the slaves arrived, they were brought to the island to
					clear it, and they disturbed the wild birds, the daisy trees, and
					ultimately the patterns of the weather, changing the course of the
					island’s river. The oldest house on the island is called L’Arbe
					de la Croix, and it has a number of architectural quirks and is
					compared in appearance to a hotel, everywhere except for in its
					kitchen. But the home’s current owner, Valerian Street, fell in
					love with it and bought it so he could retire to it from Philadelphia.
					He still pretends to his wife, Margaret (also known as the “Principal
					Beauty of Maine”), that they will return to the United States, but
					when they came to the island, he brought all of his favorite things
					with him, and he seems committed to living on the island permanently.
					He spends a lot of time in his greenhouse, where he grows, among
					other things, hydrangeas, a kind of flower that he misses from the
					United States. Valerian has one friend on the island—a Frenchman
					from Algeria named Dr. Michelin, whom Valerian met when he was suffering
					from a toothache. The two men both feel like exiles from their native
					lands.

One morning in December, Valerian’s butler, Sydney, serves
					him breakfast. The two men have a familiar relationship, and they
					banter about a number of things. Valerian asks Sydney to pick up
					some ant poison when he is out shopping for the upcoming holiday
					dinner. Sydney tells Valerian that Margaret expects Michael, their
					son, to come home for Christmas, and Valerian says she is silly
					and speculates that she must have been drinking. He also complains
					that the house is starting to feel like the Thirtieth Street Station,
					a train station in Philadelphia, because people are always arriving,
					then leaving the house. Valerian then changes the subject and jokes
					with Sydney that he should wear comfortable and climate-appropriate shoes
					like sandals, but Sydney objects that he would be less dignified in
					sandals.

Margaret comes in wearing a wrinkle-preventing device
					on her face called “Frownies.” She says that she thinks Ondine has
					served pineapple for breakfast just to insult her and that sometimes
					it seems like she is working for Ondine, rather than the reverse.
					She requests mango, and Valerian teases her about how fattening
					mangoes are and tells her that her breakfast is full of calories.
					As they argue, Sydney waits on them. Valerian criticizes Margaret
					for inviting lots of Christmas guests after he asked her not to,
					and she says she hates the island and wants to accompany Michael
					when he returns to the United States after Christmas. Valerian makes
					her promise she will only go if Michael invites her. They talk about
					Jadine and whether she will leave the island, then about how Sydney
					and Ondine seem likely to stay. Valerian mentions that at the beginning
					of their marriage Margaret used to spend lots of time with Ondine
					and adds that he put an end to their close association on the grounds
					that it was inappropriate. Margaret leaves breakfast announcing
					that she wants a proper Christmas, and she orders Sydney to obtain
					ingredients for an American Christmas meal, including apples for
					apple pie.

In the kitchen, Ondine continues to cook while Sydney
					reenters to serve breakfast to the Streets. Ondine is irritated
					at Margaret for ordering the mango and for demanding an elaborate
					Christmas menu. Ondine thinks only poor people eat mangoes, and
					she thinks that the Christmas menu is impractical. Sydney tells
					her he is tired of delivering messages between Margaret and Ondine.
					She says she does not believe Michael will come, nor that Michael
					loves Margaret. Jadine enters, and Ondine and Sydney are clearly
					glad to see her. She asks for a hot chocolate and although Sydney
					raises an eyebrow about drinking something so rich and hot on a
					tropical morning, Ondine goes to look for some chocolate.

Ondine comes out of the pantry and announces that someone
					has been stealing chocolate and refolding the wrappers. She praises Jadine’s
					beauty and comments about how great she looked on a recent magazine
					cover. Gideon, the odd-jobs man, arrives at the house but does not
					come into the kitchen. Everyone in the house, including Ondine and
					Sydney, call him “Yardman,” a general derogatory term for the poor
					black population of Queen of France. No one knows his real name.
					Gideon typically brings two women to work with him. The residents
					of L’Arbe de la Croix always call these women “Mary,” for no one
					has any interest in their real names either. Ondine is irritated
					that she cannot give Gideon a written list of chores and errands
					because he is illiterate, so she gives him an oral list instead.
					She refuses to ask him for a turkey like Margaret wanted, but she
					does ask him to get a Christmas tree.

The first few paragraphs describe the importance of Isle
					de Chevaliers as a battleground for the conflict between nature
					and civilization. Since the slaves arrived 300 years
					before, Isle de Chevaliers has been transformed from a natural paradise
					into a despoiled colonial habitat. This conflict has been waged
					on the island, and although it is tempting to see culture as the
					ultimate victor, the fact that the weather has become unpredictable
					and remains uncontrollable suggests that nature is not so easily
					vanquished. Though the river has been abused and battered, it has
					not disappeared, and the swamp that has emerged from human violations
					represents a lurking force of malevolence that can be put out of
					sight but that cannot be entirely erased. The omniscient narrator
					stresses that while nature can be injured, it cannot be eliminated.

The chapter’s opening description of the setting and surroundings
					emphasizes how the island came to appear as it does, with civilized
					additions like L’Arbe de la Croix. Here the narrator first describes
					in epic detail the transformation of Isle de Chevaliers from a natural
					paradise into a ravaged colonial habitat. Then the narrator moves
					the focus in, to a single house, Valerian’s L’Arbe de la Croix, which
					is described as a comforting place. The opening chapter also presents
					the house as a significant setting. The fact that the house is set
					apart from the other houses on the island by its age and quirky qualities
					helps to set Valerian apart from the other inhabitants because he
					is the owner of the house. This impression grows when the narrator
					explains that Valerian has moved away from his native Philadelphia
					and has chosen both to retire and to consider himself an “exile”—two
					ways of achieving a divorce from the social world. The description
					of L’Arbe de la Croix as comparable to a hotel makes the home seem
					like it has an impermanent aspect to it and is permeable or penetrable
					by the outsiders. This impression is furthered when Valerian jokes
					that Margaret’s plans for Christmas make L’Arbe de la Croix feel
					like a train station. The only part of the house that does not have
					this transient feeling is the kitchen. As in the prologue, the preparation
					of food is strongly connected with heritage and a sense of location.
					Two black characters, Ondine and Sydney, are more connected to their
					place than either the owners of the house or Jadine, who moves between
					white and black worlds. L’Arbe de la Croix has a profound effect
					on all the characters and the rest of the island.

Valerian’s greenhouse symbolizes the running conflict
					between nature and civilization. The greenhouse represents the human attempt
					to control nature and to shape it to its own ends. Valerian’s love
					for a non-native plant, the hydrangea, displays a desire to be in charge
					and control nature. Valerian grows the hydrangea in part with the
					help of classical music, a cultural form identified with Europe
					throughout the book. By selecting a specific type of music, Valerian
					thinks he has control over how quickly his plants grow. In fact,
					he makes sure that the music can only be heard in the greenhouse.
					He keeps the greenhouse separate from the rest of the house because
					he considers it his sanctuary, and only he can control it. Valerian
					not only has control over the hydrangea in the greenhouse, but he
					also has power in his household, implying that he has control over
					both civilization and nature. On the other hand, Valerian’s inability
					to control the ants in the greenhouse, and his need for poison,
					suggests that nature is not totally under his rule.

The interactions during the breakfast scene showcase the
					characters’ relationships with one another. The nested conversations
					make up the action of the chapter—Valerian’s breakfast with Sydney
					and then with Margaret in the dining room, and then Sydney and Ondine’s
					conversation in the kitchen, joined by Jadine. There is a clear overview
					of the relationships among all of the principal characters. Valerian
					is in charge of the house but also permits a level of comfort with
					Sydney that indicates friendship. With Margaret, he is intellectually
					condescending and cruel in a way that establishes his dominance
					and their previous class differences. Sydney is obedient to Valerian
					but also willing to press him on things that he believes are important.
					He is the ideal servant, both friend and aide. Yet Margaret barely
					interacts with Sydney, a sign of her disconnection from the operation
					of the house, and she is in conflict with Valerian from the moment
					she comes down for breakfast. In the kitchen, Ondine clearly hates
					Margaret, while Ondine loves Jadine. Ondine demonstrates her feelings
					in the different ways she treats the two women’s requests for what
					she sees as inappropriate breakfast foods: She looks for some chocolate
					for Jadine but does not want to serve mangoes to Margaret. Jadine’s
					sweet and slightly spoiled nature is demonstrated by her request
					for hot chocolate in the Caribbean climate. The narrator portrays
					these interactions to emphasize the characters’ feelings and opinions
					of one another.

