Naomi and Kenji were playing by the lake one summer day
					when Rough Lock Bill came along. After remarking that he didn’t
					understand the fuss about skin color, he told them a story about
					an “Indian brave” who survived a plague and went to look for a friendly
					place for his people to live. He wound up in Slocan. Its name, Rough
					Lock Bill said, came from something the brave said to his people:
					“ ‘If you go slow . . . you can go. Slow can go.’ ” Rough Lock said
					that he had seen the last remaining Indian, who never spoke, but
					chirped like a bird. Rough Lock then remarked that Naomi was remarkably
					quiet.

Rough Lock went back to his cabin. Kenji took Naomi out
					on his raft. Kenji fell off and called to Naomi to jump, but she
					couldn’t swim. Kenji went back to the shore and ran away. Naomi
					was sure he wouldn’t tell anyone what had happened. Scared and hoping
					she could swim, Naomi jumped into the water. She began to drown,
					but Rough Lock Bill rescued her.

Naomi woke in a hospital. The beds in the room were packed
					tightly together. While a nurse combed her hair roughly, Naomi thought about
					what Stephen told her: Father was in a hospital in New Denver and
					might never come home. She thought about chicks, and what it meant
					that they were yellow but eventually turned white. Because Stephen
					had a game called Yellow Peril, Naomi associated the color yellow
					with cowardice.

She thought about walking to school with Stephen one day.
					Two boys stopped them and challenged Stephen to a fight, calling
					him a “gimpy Jap.” He was going to fight them, but a missionary
					woman intervened. They got to school, and Naomi approached a circle
					of boys. She saw that they were torturing a chicken. They had cut
					its throat and were letting it bleed to death slowly while it struggled. The
					bell rang, and Naomi dashed to class, where the students sang the
					Canadian national anthem and the school song. Another day on the
					way to school, a girl with white hair accused Naomi of throwing her
					kitten down an outhouse hole. Naomi walked by the outhouse the next
					day and heard the kitten still meowing.

When Naomi returned home some time later, Nomura-obasan
					had left to live with her daughter. Time passed. Germany surrendered. The
					Slocan community grew, businesses popped up, and habits formed.
					Naomi and Obasan often went to the public bathhouse. One night in 1945,
					they bumped into Nomura-obasan there. Two unfriendly women whispered
					and stared at Naomi, and hurried two girls, sisters and schoolmates
					of Naomi’s, out of the bath. Sachiko, a high school girl, came into
					the bath with her aged grandfather, Saito-ojisan, and helped him
					bathe. Later, the girls explained that their mother said Naomi and
					everyone in her family had TB. Naomi ran home and asked what TB
					is. Without answering her, Uncle said, it’s not shameful to be sick,
					it’s just unlucky.

The morning after the war ended, Naomi had a nightmare
					about a being that resembled her mother. She got up and went to
					the outhouse. When she returned, she found that Father was in the
					cabin. Stephen came in and cried out with delight. He and Father
					played songs on their flutes.

As the story of Naomi’s childhood in Slocan continues,
					she delves into memories within memories. Not only does she recall
					being in the hospital, for example, but she also remembers what
					she remembered while she was in the hospital. The richness and specificity
					of Naomi’s memories is partly a result of the novelist’s creative
					license. Kogawa is writing a work of fiction, not a memoir, and
					as a result she is free to imbue Naomi with an almost superhuman
					memory. We might be skeptical about a memoirist who purports to
					remember the dreams she had as a seven-year-old, but we don’t think
					twice when a fictional character is doing the remembering.

In addition, the increasing depth of Naomi’s memory underlines the
					value of delving into the past. At the beginning of the novel, even the
					most basic facts about Naomi’s childhood were mysterious to us,
					and perhaps to her. As she continues to think about Slocan and the
					war years, however, detail after detail comes back to her. Kogawa
					suggests remembering is a skill, and like any skill, it improves
					with practice. By this point in the novel, Naomi’s memories have
					changed from an unknowable blur into a rich tapestry alive with
					tiny, beautiful touches. She recalls the fascination of Rough Lock’s
					Adam’s apple, the moisture on the walls of the bathhouse, the tangles
					in her hair, the sticky rice balls in her lunchbox, and on and on.
					Remembering was once a painful exercise for her. To some extent
					it still is, but the sensory richness of her memories now suggests
					that she takes at least a little pleasure in them.

Chapter 22 shows Naomi languishing
					in the hospital and presents a powerful study of a child’s suffering.
					In her weakened state, Naomi is overwhelmed by a torrent of images,
					all of which feature small, helpless things suffering at the hands
					of powerful beings. The bleeding, fluttering chicken tortured by
					the boys, the meowing cat abandoned by the racist white girl eager
					to falsely blame Naomi, the brother forced to endure the racist
					insults of bullies, all point to Naomi’s feelings of helplessness
					and victimization. Naomi identifies with these small beings. Like
					them, she has been treated badly by people older and stronger than
					she. In addition, her fixation on these innocents reveals her grim
					belief that the world is a topsy-turvy place where trustworthy authority
					figures are nowhere to be found and the defenseless are tortured
					for sport. Naomi’s solitude in the hospital underlines this idea
					of a world gone mad. While we know that Obasan has visited her,
					she does not make an appearance in the chapter, and the only visible
					authority figure is the nurse who yanks at the knots in Naomi’s
					hair. Only when her father returns is some sense of order restored
					to Naomi’s world.

Naomi’s suffering and terror are entirely internal. She
					is a quiet, stoic child by nature, so she is not given to expressing
					herself. She sees herself as a survivor. When the nurse rips at
					her hair, she thinks of the weeds and trees that are ripped from
					the ground, as well as the pain the fairy-tale character Rapunzel
					must have endured when her prince used her long hair for a ladder.
					Naomi tells herself that she too can endure discomfort without complaint.
					In addition, she has been taught the value of suppressing emotion
					out of consideration for other people. And finally, she has gathered
					that from Stephen’s racist game that to be “yellow” is to be cowardly,
					and she is determined not to be yellow. All of these factors combine
					to keep Naomi quiet about her fears, doubts, and physical pains.
					The achievement of these chapters, particularly Chapter 22,
					is to show us what can roil beneath children’s placid exteriors.

