After the party, Rearden goes to see Dagny and asks her
					to forgive him for coming with Lillian. He tells her that what he
					said at Wyatt’s house was wrong. Dagny has always known this, and
					she tells him there is nothing to forgive. Meanwhile, Lillian discovers
					that Rearden has a mistress, but she does not know who it is. 

Dr. Floyd Ferris of the State Science Institute comes
					to see Rearden and tells him that if he will not fill the order
					for Project X, he will be arrested for his illegal deal with Ken
					Dannager. Rearden refuses, and both Rearden and Dannager are indicted. 

Eddie Willers eats lunch with his worker friend. He worries about
					Dagny. She knows that Rearden is strong enough to stand trial, but
					she is afraid for Dannager. She thinks he is ready to break and
					will be taken by the destroyer. He tells the worker Dagny is going
					to see Dannager tomorrow afternoon. When Dagny reaches Dannager’s
					office, she is too late. He is with a visitor, and when he finally
					meets with her, he has already decided to retire. He assures her
					that even if she had reached him before his last visitor, she would not
					have been able to prevent his retirement. His only real regret is that
					he is leaving Rearden behind at such a dangerous time. 

Francisco comes to see Rearden at his mill. He asks Rearden
					why he is willing to accept condemnation for his virtues and sanction
					the actions of his enemies. Francisco tells Rearden his only sin
					is to agree that his self-interest is wrong. Rearden should have
					reaped incredible benefits from his invention, but instead he is
					punished for it. His hard work has only empowered the looters. Francisco
					asks Rearden what would he say if he saw Atlas holding the weight
					of the world but losing strength. Rearden asks what Francisco would
					tell him to do. “To shrug,” Francisco answers. Rearden begins to
					think he understands Francisco. Francisco is about to ask Rearden
					what makes him continue his work, when suddenly an alarm rings and they
					must rush to fix a broken furnace. They work with skill and speed,
					each knowing exactly what to do. Afterwards, Rearden asks if Francisco
					wishes to continue his question. Francisco tells him that he knows
					now exactly why Rearden remains with his mills.

At Thanksgiving dinner with his family, Rearden begins
					to see them in a new light. He finally confronts his brother Philip,
					who has sponged off of him for years without respecting him, and
					tells him he no longer cares what happens to him. He realizes that
					he has allowed his family to inflict suffering on him by accepting
					their condemnation. He will no longer offer them his sanction by
					accepting their moral code over his own. 

At his trial, Rearden refuses to participate.
					He offers no defense because he refuses to honor the proceedings
					or pretend the trial has merit. He declares that he does not recognize
					the court’s right to control the sale of his metal. He explains
					that he lives for the sake of creation and profit and that he refuses
					to apologize for his success. The crowd bursts into applause behind him.
					The judges are frightened and apologetic. They impose a $5,000 fine
					on him but suspend the sentence. 

Rearden goes to see d’Anconia at his hotel in New York.
					When he asks how a man as intelligent as Francisco could waste time
					in promiscuity, Francisco begins a discussion of sex, saying that
					a man’s lover is the embodiment of his moral code. If he despises
					himself, he will pursue immoral women. If he truly knows his own worth,
					he will seek a goddess. Though he has purposely fueled the scandals
					surrounding his own love life, Francisco has loved only one woman
					in his life. 

Rearden tells him that he has decided to sell his metal
					to whomever he wants and has ordered copper directly from d’Anconia. Francisco
					shouts he had warned Rearden not to deal with d’Anconia copper and
					runs to the phone, but stops himself. He turns to Rearden and swears
					by the woman he loves that he is his friend, though Rearden will
					soon damn him. Days later, Rearden learns that the ships bearing
					his copper were seized and sunk by the pirate Ragnar Danneskjold.

Rearden represents the mythical Atlas of whom Francisco
					speaks. He has been carrying the world and is now being punished
					for it. But he is no longer a willing participant in his own victimization.
					He has rejected the division of mind and body, and admitted to Dagny
					that his attitude toward sex has been misguided. He has confronted
					his family and put them on notice that they can no longer use his
					own sense of honor as a weapon against him. Most important, he has confronted
					the politicians who accuse him of breaking an irrational and unjust
					law. He triumphs at his trial because he withdraws his sanction.
					He refuses to help the politicians hide the brute force that is
					the true nature of their power. He tells the politicians, “If you believe
					that you have the right to force me—use your guns openly. I will
					not help you to disguise the nature of your action.” By exposing them
					for what they are, Rearden has upset the system in which the looters
					exploit their victims’ refusal to see reality. The looters need Rearden
					to work so they can feed off his productivity, so they are forced
					to set him free. In this, the essential paradox of collectivism
					is revealed. The strong are tyrannized by the weak and made to feel obligated
					to support them, but only their belief that they must allow it keeps
					them shackled. If they refuse to participate, if “Atlas shrugs,”
					the weak will have no recourse beyond brute strength. While people
					can use physical violence to coerce action, they cannot force others
					to think or create for them. 

Rearden’s transformation continues to be fueled by Francisco’s wise
					counseling. In their conversation at the mills, Rearden is closer than
					ever to understanding the message Francisco offers him. Francisco
					is on the verge of revealing more to Rearden and finally explaining
					why he must destroy his own fortune, when the fire interrupts them.
					Afterward, Francisco cannot continue. He knows that Rearden’s love
					for his work will continue to hold him. When Rearden’s copper supply
					is hijacked by Ragnar Danneskjold, he knows Francisco is behind
					the attack. The betrayal means the loss of Francisco’s friendship
					as well. 

After Dannager retires, Dagny knows that the disappearance
					of the industrialists is not a random coincidence. The timing of
					the disappearances is deliberate as well. Stockton disappeared just
					as the need for his furnaces intensified. Now Dannager is gone at
					the very moment his coal becomes essential. She is convinced a destroyer
					is loose on the world, deliberately snatching great men just as
					they are needed most. But many questions remain. Dagny must find
					out who the destroyer is and how he knows which men to take. Furthermore, if
					the vanished men are alive, where have they gone?

