Orthopedic surgeon with a mysterious past whose impulsive decision to give away Phoebe, his daughter with Down syndrome, drives the plot of the novel. David is a caring and methodical doctor but a withdrawn and anxious husband and father. He’s a passionate keeper of memories through photography, renowned for his images blending human and inanimate forms.

Read an in-depth analysis of David.

Nurse in the clinic where David Henry practices. An only child born to older parents, Caroline experienced isolation and loneliness in their overprotective care. She dreamed of being a medical missionary. Secretly in love with David Henry, Caroline complies with his unethical request to get rid of Phoebe, but ends up taking care of Phoebe as her own child.

Read an in-depth analysis of Caroline.

Beautiful wife of David Henry, mother of twins Paul and Phoebe Henry, and sister to Bree. Norah was raised to follow compliant, socially acceptable norms. She believes her daughter was born dead. Norah has several affairs following the sense of abandonment by her husband. Norah owns and operates a successful travel agency.

Read an in-depth analysis of Norah.

Son of David and Norah and brother to his twin Phoebe. Paul was raised in an affluent suburban home. He’s sensitive and empathetic and experiments with sexual encounters and drugs. A musical prodigy, Paul encounters resistance from his father in his goal to become a professional guitarist.

Daughter of David and Norah and twin sister to Paul. Phoebe was sent away at birth by her father for having Down syndrome, a chromosomal condition known as trisomy 21 that manifests in intellectual disability, heart weakness, and shortened life span.

Norah Henry’s younger sister. Free-spirited and fearless, she encourages Norah to confront her fears and take control of her life.

Husband of Caroline Gill and surrogate father to Phoebe. Al is an independent over-the-road trucker with an acute social conscience and ready kindness.

David Henry’s sister who died at age twelve from a congenital heart ailment. June was devoted to David throughout her short life, but the demands of her care on their parents left David feeling neglected.

Hires Caroline as a live-in companion to her father, Leo March, who was forced by dementia to retire as chair of the university physics department. A career woman as a PhD professor of physics, Doro creates stability in Caroline’s life by receiving baby Phoebe into her household. After the death of her father, she invites Caroline and Phoebe to stay on and eventually deeds the house to Caroline.

Mother of a Down syndrome son whose dedication inspires Caroline to advocate for Phoebe’s full potential through public education opportunities.

Homeless pregnant teenager David discovers living in his vacant childhood house after her parents tell her to give up her baby for adoption. Rosemary creates intricate nostalgic scenes using a paper art form called scherenschnitte. Mature beyond her sixteen years, she listens to David’s confession and keeps his secret as he becomes her benefactor and surrogate father to her son Jack.

Read an in-depth analysis of Rosemary.

High-functioning, sociable man with Down syndrome who loves Phoebe. They plan to marry.

Classmate of Paul’s who plays the piano in their quartet and involves him in risk-taking behavior. Drops out of school when his girlfriend becomes pregnant.

Classmate of Paul’s who seduces him into an addictive sexual relationship. Her exotic gothic appearance heightens the attraction.

Friend to Norah Henry whose daughter Elizabeth was born after Norah’s twins. Her elegance and serene family life draw Norah’s envy.

Businessman the Henrys meet in Aruba with whom Norah has her first affair.

One of Paul’s girlfriends. Michelle dismisses Paul’s desire to marry as she fears that if they marry and have children, she’ll lose her identity.

Paul’s girlfriend after Michelle leaves him. Like Paul, Alejandra is a musician and even plays the organ at his mother’s second wedding.

