As Rayona steps off of the awards platform, she sees Foxy
					glowering angrily at her. Rayona also sees Father Tom heading her
					way. A heavyset, mixed-blood cowboy comes up to Rayona, and the
					man turns out to be Dayton, Christine’s sometime boyfriend and the owner
					of the horse Rayona has just ridden. Father Tom sidles up and acts
					as if he is not surprised to see Rayona. Sky and Evelyn arrive,
					and Rayona introduces them to the others as friends from Bearpaw
					Lake State Park. The mention of the park startles Father Tom. Annabelle
					also shows up, and although Rayona hesitates to introduce her as
					a friend, Annabelle smiles and does not object to the term.

	Meanwhile, Evelyn has locked eyes with Father Tom. He
					realizes Evelyn knows about his dealings with Rayona, and he shrinks abashedly
					away into the crowd. Dayton agrees to take Rayona home, so Rayona
					goes with Evelyn and Sky to get her things from the car. Once there,
					Rayona presents Evelyn with the blanket from the park that she had
					saved for the older woman. They say goodbye, and Evelyn and Sky
					ride off. Foxy is still furious, but as he starts toward Rayona,
					Annabelle intercepts him.

	On the way back to Dayton’s ranch, Rayona finds out that
					Dayton was good friends with her uncle, Lee. When they arrive, Christine
					is both surprised and furious to see Rayona. Christine talks as
					if Rayona has greatly wronged her, pointing out how sick she has
					been and chastising Rayona for running away and worrying everybody. Rayona
					fires back, and the two sling insults at each other until Dayton
					herds them inside. They sit down in front of the television and watch
					the local news coverage of the rodeo. Rayona is a major feature,
					and Christine is amazed to learn that Rayona rode. After the news,
					an evangelical religious program comes on and everyone goes to bed.

	Rayona wakes up the next morning stiff from her rodeo
					escapade. As she dresses, she sees the horse from the rodeo out
					in the yard. Rayona recalls Dayton mentioning that once one has
					broken a horse one can ride it, so she goes outside and hops on
					Babe. The horse has other plans, however, and tosses Rayona over
					the fence.

	Christine comes outside, and she and Rayona begin talking. Christine
					explains how she lost her religious faith and gazes at Rayona the
					same way Rayona gazes at the yellow raft the day before. Christine
					says she lost her faith because of a letter supposedly from the
					Virgin Mary. There were all sorts of rumors about the letter: the pope
					was going to open it in 1960, and as a consequence
					either the world would end or Communist Russia would be converted.
					Christine had studied the apocalyptic passages in the Bible as preparation for
					the end of the world, but when nothing happened, she had become
					confused. Upon asking one of the sisters at the mission school why
					nothing had happened, the only answer she had received was that
					it was a “mystery.”

Chapter 8 opens with a seemingly
					out-of-place reference to the old western TV show the “Late Show,”
					a piece of pop culture that Dorris uses to provide parallels to
					the events of his novel. Rayona mentions that in episodes of the
					“Late Show” everything turns out all right in the end and that the
					good guy always escapes through some miraculous event that gets
					him out of whatever trouble he has been facing. Rayona’s experience
					at the rodeo is akin to these miraculous events from the “Late Show.”
					Rayona’s performance in the rodeo is unexpected and suddenly makes
					things seem to turn out well for her. As an ending to Rayona’s section
					of the novel, the rodeo ride is something of a deus ex machina—a
					literary term for an unexpected event or object that suddenly appears
					and provides a contrived solution to a seemingly unsolvable situation.

	Though the rodeo performance does bring Rayona some of
					the acceptance she has been seeking, it does not solve all of her
					problems, and Dorris leaves some loose ends for the rest of the
					novel to pick up and resolve. Even after the rodeo, Rayona’s relationship with
					her mother is still distant and contentious. When Rayona arrives
					at Dayton’s house, for example, Christine’s reaction is not what
					one might expect from a mother who has lost track of her daughter
					for several months. Christine is angry, and her anger provokes anger
					in Rayona. To Rayona, her mother’s unwelcoming attitude is irrational,
					selfish, and stupid. Rayona’s tone in this section gives another
					negative impression of Christine. In later parts of the novel we
					see this mother-daughter relationship revisited from a different
					perspective—Christine’s—at which point we begin to see more clearly
					the causes of Rayona and Christine’s misunderstandings. For now,
					however, only Rayona’s bitterness is visible.

	Christine is more courteous to Rayona the morning after
					the rodeo, and Dorris begins to reveal the many hopes and dreams
					she pins on her daughter. Christine tells Rayona the story of a
					part of her life, and Rayona notes that the expression on her mother’s
					face is much like her own expression when upon looking at the yellow
					raft the day before. Much as the raft represents an idealized fantasy
					life for Rayona, Rayona represents the same thing for Christine.
					Christine goes on to tell Rayona a confessional story about her
					loss of faith, much as Rayona tells Evelyn a confessional story
					the day before, and the parallels between these two confessions
					suggest that Christine may get the same relief from talking to her
					daughter as Rayona does from talking to Evelyn.

