Despite his complete physical transformation into an insect at the beginning
				of the story, Gregor changes very little as a character over the course of
				The Metamorphosis. Most notably, both as a man and as an insect
				Gregor patiently accepts the hardships he faces without complaint. When his father’s
				business failed, he readily accepted his new role as the money-earner in the family
				without question, even though it meant taking a job he disliked as a traveling
				salesman. Similarly, when he first realizes he has transformed into an insect, he
				does not bemoan his condition, wonder about its cause, or attempt to rectify it in
				any way. On the contrary, he quickly accepts that he has become a bug and tries to
				go about his life as best he can in his new condition. The narration in the story
				mirrors Gregor’s calm forbearance by never questioning or explaining how or why this
				odd transformation occurred or remarking on its strangeness. Instead, the story,
				much like Gregor, moves on quickly from the metamorphosis itself and focuses on the
				consequences of Gregor’s change. For Gregor, that primarily means becoming
				accustomed to his new body.

In fact reconciling his human thoughts and feelings with his new, insect body
				is the chief conflict Gregor faces in the story. Despite having changed into an
				insect, Gregor initially still wants to go to work so that he can provide for his
				family. It takes him time to realize that he can no longer play that role in his
				family and that he can’t even go outside in his current state. As the story
				continues, Gregor’s insect body has an increasing influence on his psychology. He
				finds that he is at ease hiding in the dark under the sofa in his room, like a bug
				would, even though his body won’t fit comfortably. He also discovers that he enjoys
				crawling on the walls and ceiling. But Gregor’s humanity never disappears entirely.
				He still feels human emotions and has strong memories of his human life. As a
				result, even though he knows he would feel more physically comfortable if his room
				were emptied of furniture, allowing him to crawl anywhere he pleased, Gregor panics
				when Grete and his mother are taking out the furniture, such as the writing desk he
				remembers doing all his assignments at as a boy. In a desperate attempt to hold onto
				the few reminders he has of his humanity, he clings to the picture of the woman
				muffled in fur so that no one will take it away. Ultimately he’s unable to fully
				adapt to his new body or to find a new role within his family, which is disgusted by
				him and ashamed of his presence in the house. Toward the end of the story, he even
				feels haunted by the thought that he might be able to take control of the family’s
				affairs again and resume his role as the family’s money-earner. Despite these hopes,
				he decides it would be best for the family if he were to disappear entirely, and so
				he dies much as he lived: accepting his fate without complaint and thinking of his
				family’s best interests.

