Although he remains away in Mexico for much of
Edna’s awakening, Robert Lebrun plays an invaluable role in its
beginning and end. His flirtations, along with Adèle’s freedom of
expression, inspire Edna to forget her reserve and to begin revealing
herself to others. For several summers, Robert has devoted himself
to women at Grand Isle, showering them with affections rooted in
admiration but lacking serious intent. Although notoriously ruled
by his passions and impulses, he nevertheless cannot forget the
societal conventions that both allow and limit his actions. Unlike
the Creole women who play along with his flirtations, enjoying the
company and attention, Edna is swept away by Robert’s devotion.
She sees in him a promise of the love and excitement that have been
missing from her life since she married Léonce. Although he never
consummates their relationship physically, Robert’s tender treatment
of Edna proves that his love for her extends beyond the superficial
adoration he is used to showing his female companions. When Robert
recognizes the intensity of his feelings for Edna, he decides to
go to Mexico because he cannot bear to be near Edna and know that
he may never act on his love.

Robert’s courtship of Edna on Grand Isle perches precariously on
the boundary between innocence and misconduct, suggesting that defiance
and daring may lie beneath his reputation as a harmless flirt. Robert’s
sudden return from Mexico and his unrealistic plan to request that
Léonce set Edna free so that Robert may make her his wife manifest
a bolder side to Robert’s nature. However, Robert pragmatically
recognizes the difference between daydream and reality. When he
returns to New Orleans, he accepts the impossibility of his intentions,
and he ignores Edna’s claims of independence and self-ownership.
Despite his sincere love and urgent lust, Robert cannot, as Edna
has, escape from or ignore the rules of society. The note he leaves
when he flees her house sums up for Edna the unjust, unchangeable
state of the world around her. Robert’s ultimate fidelity to convention
and society solidifies her disappointment with life and with the
role she is expected to play. While Edna despairs over Robert’s
rejection of her, her suicide is not a response to her disappointment
but rather to the final awakening that it affords her. When even
Robert, whose love matches the sincerity and desperation of her
own, will not trespass the boundaries of societal convention, Edna
acknowledges the profundity of her solitude.

Take the Analysis of Major Characters Quick Quiz 

