Chief Bromden, nicknamed “Chief Broom” because the aides
				make him sweep the halls, narrates One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s
					Nest. Although he says that he is telling the story about
				“the hospital, and her, and the guys—and about McMurphy,” he is
				also telling the story of his own journey toward sanity. When the
				novel begins, Bromden is paranoid, bullied, and surrounded much
				of the time by a hallucinated fog that represents both his medicated
				state and his desire to hide from reality. Moreover, he believes
				that he is extremely weak, even though he used to be immensely strong; because
				he believes it, he is extremely weak. By the end
				of the novel, the fog has cleared, and Bromden has recovered the
				personal strength to euthanize McMurphy, escape from the hospital,
				and record his account of the events.

Bromden is six feet seven inches tall (or six feet eight inches,
				the book is inconsistent), but because he
				has been belittled for so long, he thinks he “used to be big, but
				not no more.” He has been a patient in an Oregon psychiatric hospital
				for ten years. Everyone in the hospital believes that he is deaf
				and dumb. When McMurphy begins to pull him out of the fog, he realizes
				the source of his charade: “it wasn’t me that started acting deaf;
				it was people that first started acting like I was too dumb to hear
				or see or say anything at all.” As Bromden himself is demystified,
				so too is the truth behind what has oppressed him and hindered his
				recovery.

This oppression has been in place since Bromden’s childhood.
				He is the son of Chief Tee Ah Millatoona, which means The Pine That Stands
				Tallest on the Mountain, and a white woman, Mary Louise Bromden,
				the dominant force in the couple. Chief Bromden bears his mother’s
				last name; his father’s acceptance of her name symbolizes her dominance
				over him. In one telling experience, when Bromden was ten years
				old, three government officials came to see his father about buying
				the tribe’s land so they could build a hydroelectric dam, but Bromden
				was home alone. When he tried to speak to the officials, they acted
				as if he was not there. This experience sows the seeds for his withdrawal
				into himself, and initiates the outside world’s treatment of him
				as if he were deaf and dumb. Bromden’s mother joined forces with
				some of the members of the tribe to pressure Bromden’s father to
				sell the land. Bromden, like his father, is a big man who comes
				to feel small and helpless.

The reason for Bromden’s hospitalization is cloaked in
				ambiguity. He may have had a breakdown from witnessing the decline
				of his father or from the horrors of fighting in World War II. Both
				of these possible scenarios involve an emasculating and controlling authority—in
				the first case the government officials, in the second the army.
				These authority figures provide Bromden with fodder for his dark
				vision of society as an oppressive conglomeration that he calls
				the Combine. It is also possible that, like McMurphy, Bromden was
				sane when he entered the hospital but that his sanity slipped when
				he received what is rumored to be 200 electroshock
				treatments. The paranoia and hallucinations he suffers from, which
				center on hidden machines in the hospital that physically and psychologically
				control the patients, can be read as metaphors for the dehumanization
				he has experienced in his life.

