Trudging dejectedly from Rhett’s jail cell, Scarlett encounters
					Frank Kennedy in a new buggy. Frank says that he now owns a store
					and plans to buy a sawmill soon, which would be extremely profitable because
					of all the rebuilding needed in Atlanta. Despite Frank’s engagement
					to Suellen, Scarlett determines that she must marry Frank in order
					to pay the taxes on Tara. She tells Frank that Suellen is set to
					marry another man. Scarlett realizes that, contrary to most well-bred
					Southerners, she would rather have money than pride.

A startling thought this, that a woman
						could handle business matters as well as or better than a man. .
						.

Two weeks later, Frank marries Scarlett and gives her
					the money to save Tara. Scarlett ignores Suellen’s sadness and the
					neighbors’ malicious gossip. She manipulates Frank into making more
					profitable business decisions, fending off guilt with her practice
					of putting off worrying about things. Frank soon falls ill, and
					Scarlett takes advantage of his immobility, going to the store to
					see the account books. She quickly realizes that Frank runs the
					business badly—his friends owe him vast sums of money that he is
					too embarrassed to collect. Scarlett thinks she could do a much
					better job in the strictly male world of business and begins to
					think of acquiring a sawmill.

	Rhett, who has blackmailed his way out of jail, enters
					the store and congratulates Scarlett on her marriage. After mocking
					her for still loving Ashley, Rhett changes his tone and agrees to
					loan her the money to buy the sawmill as long as she does not use
					the money to help Ashley.

To Frank’s chagrin, Scarlett quickly becomes a ruthless
					businesswoman, devoting all her time to the mill and turning a sizable
					profit by any means necessary. Scarlett is the only businesswoman
					in Atlanta, and the city gossips disapprovingly. Embarrassed and afraid
					of his wife, Frank hopes that a baby will take Scarlett’s mind off
					business.

Tony Fontaine, a planter’s son from Scarlett’s county,
					arrives one night in a panic. He has killed Jonas Wilkerson and
					a black man. He explains that Wilkerson was telling freed slaves
					they have the right to rape white women, and one such slave made
					a lewd comment to Tony’s sister-in-law. Ashley, who accompanied
					Tony on his revenge mission, advised him to seek help from Scarlett
					and Frank. Tony leaves, and Scarlett reflects that the South has
					become a dangerous place. She begins to fear losing everything to
					the powerful Yankee government and freed slaves, and she pins all
					her hopes for safety on making money. She tells Frank that she is
					pregnant. While Frank glows with pride and relief, Scarlett thinks
					of the Ku Klux Klan, a newly formed organization supposedly intended
					to protect whites against violent blacks. She feels grateful that
					Frank is not in the Klan because the government in the North has
					been gearing up to crush the organization.

Scarlett searches for the right man to run the mill while
					the birth and the baby occupy her. To the horror of old Atlanta,
					she also begins doing business with the Yankees, although she hates
					them. She shakes with anger when three Yankee women declare in front
					of Uncle Peter that blacks are untrustworthy. Scarlett begins to
					run into Rhett frequently, and she drinks brandy to soothe her nerves. News
					arrives that Gerald is dead, and Scarlett heads home with a heavy
					heart.

Scarlett’s return to Atlanta to marry Frank Kennedy begins
					a new stage in the novel, and her emergence as a ruthless businesswoman begins
					a new stage in the development of her character as a strong, independent
					woman. People in Atlanta describe Scarlett’s head for business as
					masculine or unladylike, but, despite criticism, Scarlett drives
					ahead and proves herself more business-savvy than any man in the
					novel except Rhett. Frank feels emasculated and embarrassed by Scarlett’s
					success, but he is too weak-willed to stop her. Only Rhett does
					not disapprove of Scarlett’s decision to enter the business world.
					As Scarlett becomes more independent, she feels drawn to Rhett because
					he talks business with her and respects the business-savvy facet
					of her character. With her newly discovered business acumen, Scarlett
					finds herself in an unlikely alliance with Rhett. They share an
					unabashed instinct for self-preservation that nearly everyone around
					them lacks. Scarlett’s business savvy also brings her into further
					contact with Yankee businessmen and paves the way for her movement
					into Yankee social circles.

	The brief scene depicting Tony Fontaine’s escape raises
					the tense issue of race relations in the era after the war. We see
					evidence of the violence of this relationship earlier in Rhett’s
					arrest for allegedly killing a black man who insulted a white woman.
					Historically, freed slaves (often referred to as “free-issue” blacks
					in the novel) lacked resources, education, property, and self-direction,
					and white Northerners manipulated them in an effort to shore up
					political power. The bulk of the freed slaves found shelter in squalid,
					hastily built shantytowns. Mitchell ignores these facts, however—one
					of the novel’s most blatant exhibitions of racism. She describes
					black people’s lives as “a never-ending picnic” and attributes their
					hardships to their inability to care for themselves once away from
					the plantation owners’ care. She describes freed slaves as “creatures
					of small intelligence” who take “perverse pleasure in destruction.”
					The only blacks not portrayed as part of a threatening, insolent
					mass are loyal house servants like Mammy and Pork, who never once
					indicate any dissatisfaction with their lowly position. The novel
					doesn’t make any acknowledgment that unhappy house slaves even existed,
					nor does it hint at the terrible and terrifying power of slave-owners
					over their slaves. Rather, it portrays a world in which slaves are
					always a beloved part of the family, and no one strikes them except
					the brutal Scarlett.

	Mitchell’s racism reveals the mindset of Southern gentleman
					like Ashley Wilkes. Terrified by their sudden loss of political
					and social power, such men fixed blame on blacks. Confused by a
					world of freed slaves, they became convinced that black men posed
					a sexual threat to white women, and formed the Ku Klux Klan to protect their
					wives and to feel important and powerful once again. Mitchell does
					point to the Klan’s danger and foolishness, but she mitigates her
					condemnation of the group by showing only peaceful Klan participants.
					Even though Ashley supports the Klan, he opposes the organization
					on principle and is “against violence of any sort.” Thus Mitchell
					suggests that men like Ashley join the immoral Klan on moral grounds
					and thus cannot be faulted for their membership if they refrain
					from violence. According to Mitchell, they remain unsullied by the
					Klan’s evil as long as they stick fast to their own principles.
					Mitchell’s demeaning depiction of blacks and her neutrality about
					the Ku Klux Klan demonstrate that racism pervaded not only Scarlett’s
					time but also Mitchell’s.

