Episode Seven takes place in the Freeman newspaper
					offices. New-spaper-like headlines break the episode up into smaller
					passages. Without the headlines, the episode reads much the same
					as previous episodes have. 

	In Dublin’s city-center, tramcars, postal carts, and
					porter barrels simultaneously roll to their destinations. Bloom
					is in the back office of the Freeman getting a
					copy of his Keyes advertisement. Bloom walks through the printing
					rooms to the Telegraph offices, which are under
					the same ownership as the Freeman. He approaches
					the foreman, City Councillor Nanetti, who is Italian by birth and
					Irish by choice. Nanetti is speaking to Hynes about his report of
					Dignam’s funeral. Hynes owes Bloom three shillings, and Bloom tries
					to tactfully remind him about it, but Hynes does not catch on. 

	Over the noise of the presses, Bloom describes the new
					design for the Keyes ad: two keys crossed, to evoke the independent
					parliament of the Isle of Man and thus the dream of Irish home-rule. Nanetti
					tells Bloom to get a copy of the design and to secure three months
					advertisement from Keyes. Bloom listens for a moment to the sound
					of papers shuffling through the printer, then walks toward the staff
					offices. Bloom watches the men typeset backward and thinks of his
					father reading Hebrew, from right to left. Bloom enters the Evening
						Telegraph office, where Professor MacHugh and Simon Dedalus
					are listening to Ned Lambert, who is mocking Dan Dawson’s overwrought
					patriotic speech, reprinted in the morning newspaper. J.J. O’Molloy
					enters and the doorknob bumps Bloom. Bloom remembers O’Molloy’s
					past as a promising lawyer—O’Molloy now has money troubles.

	Lambert continues to mock Dawson’s speech—Bloom agrees with
					the criticism but reminds himself that such speeches are well-received
					in person. Crawford enters, greeting MacHugh with mock disgust.
					Dedalus and Lambert leave for a drink. Bloom uses Crawford’s telephone
					to call Keyes. Lenehan enters with the sports edition and proclaims
					that Sceptre will win today’s horserace. We hear Bloom on the phone—he
					seems to have missed Keyes at his office. Re-entering the room,
					Bloom bumps into Lenehan. Bloom tells Crawford that he is headed
					out to settle the Keyes ad—Crawford could not care less. A minute
					later, MacHugh notices from the window that the newsboys are following
					Bloom, mimicking his jerky walk. Lenehan imitates it too.

	O’Molloy offers MacHugh a cigarette. Lenehan lights their
					cigarettes, waiting to be offered one. Crawford jokes with MacHugh,
					a Latin professor, about the Roman Empire. Lenehan tries to tell
					a riddle, but no one listens. 

	O’Madden Burke enters with Stephen Dedalus behind him. Stephen
					hands Deasy’s letter to Crawford. Crawford knows Deasy and comments
					on Deasy’s ornery late wife, which helps Stephen understand Deasy’s
					view that women are responsible for the sin of the world. Crawford
					skims Deasy’s letter and agrees to publish it. MacHugh is arguing
					that the Greeks and the Irish are similar because they are dominated
					by other cultures (Roman and British, respectively) yet retain a
					spirituality that those cultures do not have. Lenehan finally tells
					his riddle. Crawford comments on the gathering of many talents in
					the room (literature, law, etc.). MacHugh remarks that Bloom would
					represent the art of advertising, and O’Madden Burke adds that Mrs.
					Bloom would add vocal talent. Lenehan makes a suggestive comment
					about Molly.

	Crawford asks Stephen to write something sharp for the
					paper. Crawford recalls the great talent of Ignatius Gallaher, who
					reported on the 1882 Phoenix Park murders
					(the British chief secretary and under-secretary were killed). This
					recollection sparks many individual stories about the murders and
					the Invincibles, the group who claimed responsibility. Some of them
					were hanged, but others remain alive, such as Skin-the-Goat, a character
					who will appear later in Ulysses. Meanwhile, MacHugh
					answers the telephone. It is Bloom, but Crawford is too preoccupied
					with the conversation to speak with him. 

	O’Molloy tells Stephen that he and Professor Magennis
					were speaking of Stephen. They are curious about Stephen’s opinion
					of A.E., the mystical poet. Stephen resists the urge to ask what
					Magennis said about him. MacHugh interrupts to describe the finest
					example of eloquence—John F. Taylor’s speech at the Trinity College historical
					society debate over the revival of the Irish tongue. MacHugh re-enacts
					the speech, which equated the British, who threaten to culturally
					overwhelm the Irish, to the Egyptians, who threaten to completely
					assimilate the Jews.

	Stephen suggests they adjourn to a pub, and Lenehan leads
					the way. O’Molloy holds Crawford behind to ask him for a loan. Stephen
					walks outside with Professor MacHugh and tells MacHugh a cryptic
					parable of two old virgins who go to the top of Nelson’s pillar
					to see the views of Dublin and eat plums.

	While Stephen tells his story, Crawford finally emerges
					outside and Bloom, on his way in, attempts to accost him on the
					front steps. Bloom wants approval for two month’s renewal of the
					Keyes ad instead of three. Crawford turns this offer down flippantly
					and returns to his conversation with O’Molloy. He cannot lend O’Molloy
					any money.

	Ahead, Stephen’s story continues: the women, giddy at
					the top of the pillar, eat their plums and spit the seeds over the
					side. Stephen laughs—the story is apparently over, but the listeners
					are confused. Stephen names his story “A Pisgah Sight of Palestine”
					or “The Parable of the Plums.” MacHugh laughs knowingly.
					Meanwhile, the trams and other vehicles all across the city continue
					to roll.

Episode Seven, “Aeolus,” is the first episode in which
					the text seems conscious of itself as a text. The newspaper-like
					headlines break up the otherwise-familiar text and suggest to the
					reader that an outside editor, author, or arranger is responsible
					for them. We are no longer involved in a one-on-one relation with
					the plot of Ulysses—someone is filtering this information
					for us.			

The episode parallels the aftermath of Odysseus’s visit
					to Aeolus, the god of the winds in the Odyssey. One
					of Odysseus’s men disobeys him, opening a bag of winds that then
					blows them off-course. In the “Aeolus” episode of Ulysses, wind
					is represented by the windy rhetoric used in journalism and oratory.
					The newspaper-room setting of the chapter, the episode’s headlines,
					and the men’s own inflated speech, together with the conversation
					about rhetorical and journalistic triumphs, all support the theme
					of the episode. Additionally, within the headlines and within the
					general text of the episode, over sixty different rhetorical figures
					(such as hyperbole, metonymy, chiasmus) are demonstrated.

											Episode Seven also recalls one of Joyce’s earlier
					works—the short-story collection, Dubliners. Several Dubliners characters appear
					here (Lenehan, Ignatius Gallaher), and the sense of futility and
					paralysis of Dubliners filters into this episode
					depicting mid-day idleness, disappointment, and frustration. Just
					as Odysseus’s ship was blown off-course by the winds released from
					the bag, several characters are thwarted in their individual quests.
					Bloom does not get the Keyes ad in the paper, O’Molloy does not
					get a loan from Crawford, Stephen never makes it to meet Buck at
					the Ship pub at noon. If rhetoric is a means for making arguments
					and convincing listeners, it gets short shrift here. Few comprehensive
					connections are made in this episode—points and arguments trail
					off or are swallowed in the noise of the newspaper pressrooms. Instead,
					language works to obscure and divide: inside jokes, cryptic remarks,
					and stage-whispered comments abound.

Episode Seven is the first episode in which Stephen and
					Bloom actually cross paths (at the very end of the episode). Notably, Stephen
					ignores Bloom, while Bloom, father-like, notes Stephen’s newer boots
					and, with disapproval, that Stephen has muck on his shoes and is
					leading the way to the pub. Bloom’s and Stephen’s separate but equal
					time in the episode invites comparison between their appearances
					in the Freeman offices. Bloom fails in his task
					of securing the Keyes ad for three months, while Stephen succeeds
					in getting Deasy’s letter printed. Stephen has the center of the
					room, physically and symbolically, while Bloom remains unseen on
					the outskirts, bumped more than once. Bloom is jokingly referred
					to as a representative for the art of advertising, while Stephen
					is treated like a near-equal by the men and is even offered the
					chance to write for the paper. We also notice the two men’s differing
					approaches to the domain of public expression. Bloom, as we have
					seen, has a pragmatic approach to the art of writing, oratory, and
					advertising. In Episode Four, we saw him consider writing fiction
					himself, in part to make money by it. Stephen, though flattered
					by the newspapermen’s high expectations for him, will not waste
					himself on their type of writing—he will remain focused on his art,
					his poetry.

