A mawkish, clichéd, third-person narrative describes the
					summer evening on Sandymount Strand, near Mary, Star of the Sea
					church. Bloom stands across the beach from three girlfriends—Cissy
					Caffrey, Edy Boardman, and Gerty MacDowell—and their charges: Cissy’s
					twin toddler brothers and Edy’s baby brother. Cissy and Edy tend
					to the babies and occasionally tease Gerty, who is sitting some distance
					away. The narrative sympathetically describes Gerty as beautiful,
					and outlines the commercial products she uses to maintain her looks.
					Gerty’s crush—the boy who bicycles past her house—has been aloof
					lately. Gerty daydreams of marriage and domestic life with a silent,
					strong man. Meanwhile, Edy and Cissy deal loudly with the children’s
					disputes. Gerty is mortified by her friends’ unladylike obscenity,
					especially in front of the gentleman (Bloom). Nearby, at the Star
					of the Sea church, a men’s temperance retreat begins with a supplication
					to the Virgin. 

	The toddlers kick their ball too far. Bloom picks it
					up and throws it back—the ball rolls to a stop under Gerty’s skirt.
					Gerty tries to kick the ball to Cissy but misses. Gerty senses Bloom’s
					eyes on her and notices his sad face. She fantasizes that he is
					a foreigner in mourning who needs her comfort. Gerty displays her
					ankles and her hair for Bloom, knowing she is arousing him. 

	Gerty wonders aloud how late it is, hoping Cissy and
					Edy will take the children home. Cissy approaches Bloom and asks
					for the time. Bloom’s watch has stopped. Gerty watches Bloom put
					his hands back in his pockets and senses the onset of her menstrual cycle.
					She yearns to know Bloom’s story—is he married? A widower? Duty-bound
					to a madwoman?

	Cissy and the others are preparing to leave when the
					fireworks from the Mirus bazaar begin. They run down the strand
					to watch, but Gerty remains. Gerty leans back, holding her knee
					in her hands, knowingly revealing her legs, while she watches a
					“long Roman candle” firework shoot high in the sky. At the climax
					of the episode and Gerty’s emotions (and Bloom’s own orgasmic climax,
					we soon realize) the Roman candle bursts in the air, to cries of
					“O! O!” on the ground.

	As Gerty rises and begins to walk to the others, Bloom
					realizes that she is lame in one foot. He feels shock and pity,
					then relief that he did not know this when she was arousing him.
					Bloom ponders the sexual appeal of abnormalities, then women’s sexual
					urges as heightened by their menstrual cycles. Remembering Gerty’s
					two friends, he considers the competitiveness of female friendships,
					like Molly’s with Josie Breen. Bloom remembers that his watch was stopped
					at 4:30, and he wonders
					if that is when Molly and Boylan had sex. 

	Bloom rearranges his semen-stained shirt and ponders
					strategies for seducing women. Bloom wonders if Gerty noticed him
					masturbating—he guesses that she did, as women are very aware. He briefly
					wonders if Gerty is Martha Clifford. Bloom thinks about how soon
					girls become mothers, then of Mrs. Purefoy at the nearby maternity
					hospital. Bloom ponders the “magnetism” that could account for his
					watch stopping when Boylan and Molly were together, perhaps the
					same magnetism that draws men and women together. 

	Bloom smells Gerty’s perfume in the air—a cheap smell,
					not like Molly’s complex scent, opoponax. Bloom smells inside his
					waistcoat, wondering what a man’s smell would be. The scent of the lemon
					soap reminds him that he forgot to pick up Molly’s lotion. 

	A “nobleman” passes Bloom. Bloom wonders about the man and
					considers writing a story called “The Mystery Man on the Beach.”
					This thought reminds him of the macintosh man at Dignam’s funeral.
					Looking at Howth lighthouse, Bloom considers the science of light
					and colors, then the day he and Molly spent there. Now, Boylan is
					with her. Bloom feels drained. He notices that Mass seems to be
					over. The postman makes his nine o’clock round with a lamp. A newsboy
					cries the results of the Gold Cup race. 

	Bloom decides to avoid going home just yet. He reconsiders
					the incident in Barney Kiernan’s— perhaps the citizen meant no harm. Bloom
					thinks about his evening visit to Mrs. Dignam. Bloom tries to remember
					his dream last night. Molly was dressed in Turkish breeches and
					red slippers. 

	Bloom picks up a stray piece of paper, then a stick.
					Wondering if Gerty will return tomorrow, he begins to write her
					a message in the sand—“I AM A”—but stops
					as there is not sufficient room. He erases the letters and throws
					the stick, which lands straight up in the sand. He decides to have
					a short nap, and his thoughts become muddled by sleep. Bloom dozes
					off as a cuckoo clock chimes in the priest’s house nearby.

In Episode Thirteen of Ulysses, Gerty
					MacDowell corresponds to Princess Nausicaa, who, in The
						Odyssey, discovers Odysseus asleep on the beach and tends
					to him. Gerty, associated with blue and white, also seems to correspond
					to the Virgin Mary. Sounds from the nearby temperance retreat are
					interspersed with Gerty’s narrative, creating an ironic parallel
					between Gerty and Mary: as Gerty dreams of ministering to a husband
					and opens herself to Bloom’s supplicating sexual attention, so do
					the men in the church appeal to the statue of the Virgin Mary for
					comfort and aid. Episode Thirteen is the first episode of Ulysses that
					centers on a female consciousness, and it inaugurates the final
					sections of the book, which are more female-centered in their characters
					and settings.

	The first half of Episode Thirteen centers on Gerty’s
					appearance and consciousness, and we only hear Bloom’s interior
					monologue in the second half of the episode. Gerty’s half consists
					of several barely distinct narrative points of view and styles.
					The narrative is sympathetic with Gerty, and Gerty’s consciousness
					slides in and out of the narrative—her interior monologue is sometimes
					rendered directly. The narrative’s style borrows from (and parodies)
					the prose of both moralizing, sentimental literature and consumer-oriented
					women’s magazines. The style is accordingly full of emotional clichés,
					effusive diction, and imprecise descriptions. Additionally, the
					style of the narrative is such that unpleasant realities and indelicate
					details are filtered out. Thus, Gerty’s lame foot is only slightly
					alluded to, as is masturbation.

	The feminine pleasantries and the focus on sentimental
					love in Episode Thirteen seem to be something of a response to Episode Twelve’s
					masculine violence and prejudice. This hypothesis fits with the
					workings of Ulysses, by which previous perspectives
					are tempered by later styles and character viewpoints. Thus, Bloom’s
					foreignness—a detriment in Episode Twelve—becomes an attractive asset
					for him in Episode Thirteen. Yet Episodes Twelve and Thirteen ultimately
					turn out to have straightforward affinities. Excess lacking substance
					seems common to both, from the hyperbolic lists of Episode Twelve
					to the lush expositions of Episode Thirteen. And both episodes seem
					to offer examples of categorical or stereotypical thinking. The
					citizen’s logic worked on the seemingly straightforward basis of
					race and religion. Gerty’s thoughts offer conventional ideas, while
					the narrative of Episode Thirteen invites us to evaluate Gerty as
					an entirely typical Irish girl.

	Women in Episode Thirteen are defined, in part, by their
					perceptiveness about who is looking at them and when. Women become sexual
					beings through their ability to present themselves to be looked
					at, and Bloom’s erotic moments are voyeuristic. Stephen, in “Proteus,”
					experimented with closing his eyes and concentrating on his other
					senses. The second half of Episode Thirteen reflects a shift of
					emphasis from the eyes to the nose. Bloom’s thoughts hover around
					smells and smelling. The distinction between the emphasis on senses
					in the two beach episodes seems to lie in the import of Stephen’s
					and Bloom’s musings—Stephen seeks to understand how our senses order
					our relationship to the physical world, while Bloom’s thoughts dwell
					on sight and smelling as ordering relationships between people.	

		Like the other women whom Bloom has seen and fantasized about
					so far in Ulysses, Gerty eventually reminds Bloom
					of Molly, suggesting that Bloom’s desire for Molly is often refracted
					through another woman. It is in this episode that Bloom notices
					for the first time that his watch has stopped, apparently sometime
					between four and five o’clock—perhaps at the exact time of Boylan
					and Molly’s tryst. Yet our sympathy for Bloom’s sadness at this
					thought is tempered by the circumstances of the discovery—Bloom
					himself is conducting a tryst at this later hour, albeit an unconsummated
					one.

