On Monday, Grant sees Tante Lou, Reverend Ambrose, and
					Miss Emma returning from visiting Jefferson. They stop at Miss Emma’s house
					and go inside. In school, Grant finds his students planning for the
					annual Christmas program. He reminds them to keep just one person
					in mind this Christmas season, referring to Jefferson. 

	At her request, Grant visits Miss Emma. Miss Emma knows Grant
					lied about his previous visit to Jefferson, because her own visit
					was disturbing: Jefferson asked her if she had any “corn for a hog,”
					asking viciously and repeatedly until Miss Emma grew so distressed
					that she slapped him. Grant is irritated, feeling once
					again that he cannot help Jefferson and stating that he will not
					let Jefferson make him feel guilty. Tante Lou insists that Grant
					continue his visits.

Over the course of the week, Grant feels his anger dissipating.
					He reflects on the fact that he never stays angry for a long time, although
					he never believes in anything for very long either. 

On Friday, when Grant enters Jefferson’s cell, he has
					no idea how to help Jefferson. He tries talking about Miss Emma
					and the pain Jefferson causes her. Jefferson says that Grant wouldn’t
					be talking about love and compassion if Grant sat on death row.
					Jefferson says he never asked to be born. Saying that Grant’s visits
					anger him, Jefferson threatens to scream and cause a ruckus. Grant
					thinks that despite Jefferson’s angry words, his eyes indicate that
					he needs Grant. Jefferson says only the living need to have good
					manners; then he throws his food on the floor.

	At Guidry’s request, Grant enters his office and stands
					for a few minutes, waiting as the sheriff talks on the phone. When
					Guidry finally hangs up, he asks Grant whether or not he sees an
					improvement in Jefferson, and Grant answers sincerely that he does
					not. Guidry is angry, and Grant finds out later that his anger stems
					from a visit Miss Emma paid to Mrs. Guidry, during which she asked
					if she could meet with Jefferson in the dayroom or in some other
					large room so that she could sit down. Grant denies Guidry’s accusation that
					Grant encouraged Miss Emma to make the request. Guidry asks Clark
					and a “fat man” named Frank what he should do. Clark declares that
					Jefferson should remain in his cell, Frank declines to answer, and
					Guidry decides to ask Jefferson what he would prefer. Still, Guidry
					says, even if Jefferson gets to go to the dayroom, he will have
					to be in shackles. 

As promised, Guidry asks Jefferson if he would like to
					meet his visitors in the dayroom, and he says he would. When Miss
					Emma, Tante Lou, and Reverend Ambrose visit Jefferson in the day
					room, Jefferson’s arms and legs are shackled. He sits down at the
					table and Miss Emma tries to feed him, but he refuses to eat.

	Grant goes to visit Jefferson. Again, Jefferson
					refuses to eat. Grant mentions the Christmas program, and Jefferson
					asks whether Christmas was when Christ was born or when he died.
					Grant responds, “Born.” Jefferson says that Easter was when “they
					nailed Him to the cross.” Grant asks Jefferson if he knows what
					“moral” means. He reminds Jefferson that human beings have an obligation
					to each other. Jefferson insists that he is only a hog, not a human
					being.

Grant begins to realize that he has a capricious
					nature. His anger waxes and wanes, and his beliefs shift quickly.
					Sometimes he agrees with Professor Antoine’s cynical worldview,
					sometimes he feels more optimistic than his teacher. Grant alternates
					between neutrality and near-desperation, between insisting he cannot
					help Jefferson and determining to reach Jefferson somehow. First,
					he complains to Miss Emma that he does not want to go back to Jefferson;
					he then tries to engage Jefferson positively when he visits him.
					Gaines shows how Grant begins to sense his own failings, and, in
					doing so, he begins to enable himself to evoke positive change in
					Jefferson. This change is not immediately perceptible, but even
					though Jefferson continues to shun his food and to sarcastically
					and aggressively insist that he is a hog, at least Grant begins
					to find some strength in these scenes.

	Sheriff Guidry both embodies and defies the characteristics
					of the typically racist white man. Gaines’s description shows that
					Grant and the other black characters would face harsh consequences
					for displaying insolence or disrespect toward Guidry and other men
					of his ilk. Grant must stand and wait while the sheriff uses the
					phone, and he must end each sentence by calling Guidry “sir.” However,
					at times Guidry transcends the stereotypical behavior of the bigoted, authoritarian,
					white racist. Even though Grant’s visits to Jefferson have become
					a nuisance, Guidry cannot bring himself to end the visitation rights.
					He also makes a concession to Miss Emma, even though she went behind
					his back to ask his wife about meeting Jefferson in the dayroom.
					Gaines juxtaposes Guidry’s softening heart with the unfeeling reactions
					of the other whites in the room. Whereas Chuck has no pity for the
					black man, and Frank refuses to consider his plight, Guidry displays
					gruff feeling for Jefferson. Guidry tries to maintain his authority
					while granting concessions not only to his wife, but to Miss Emma,
					Jefferson, and possibly his own conscience. 

By refusing to use his intellectual and spiritual capabilities,
					Jefferson becomes the negative archetype of his race. He decides
					to carry the mantle of inferiority placed on him, rather than fight
					to shake it off. From perversity and anger, he willingly embodies
					all of the stereotypes whites heap on blacks: he does not think
					or act independently; he does not fight against his oppressors;
					he is more animal than man. By embodying these stereotypes and acting
					like an animal, he throws the ugliness of stereotypes in the face
					of his black friends and relations. Although Jefferson insists he
					does not want Grant’s help, he undermines that assertion by showing
					Grant how much his lawyer’s humiliating words hurt him. When he
					roots about in his food and calls himself a hog, he wordlessly shows
					Grant his anger and shame at being called a hog, and asks Grant
					for help in digging himself out of the stereotype he has come to
					embody. For the first half of this novel, Jefferson is not only
					physically imprisoned, he is spiritually imprisoned by his own unhappiness. 

