Lindo Jong learns from an early age the powers of “invisible strength”—of
				hiding one’s thoughts until the time is ripe to reveal them, and
				of believing in one’s inner force even when one finds oneself at
				a disadvantage. She discovers these values while in China, caught
				in a loveless marriage and oppressed by the tyranny of her mother-in-law.
				By playing upon her mother-in-law’s superstition and fear, Lindo
				eventually extricates herself from the marriage with her dignity
				intact, and without dishonoring her parents’ promise to her husband’s
				family.

Lindo later teaches these skills of invisible strength—for
				which she uses the wind as a metaphor—to her daughter Waverly. Her
				lessons nurture Waverly’s skill at chess, but Waverly comes to resent her
				mother’s control and seeming claims of ownership over her successes.
				Eventually, Waverly seems to become ashamed of Lindo and misunderstands
				her as a critical, controlling, and narrow-minded old woman.

Lindo perhaps experiences the largest crisis of cultural
				identity of any of the characters. She regrets having wanted to
				give Waverly both American circumstances and a Chinese character,
				stating that the two can never successfully combine. She thinks
				that from the moment she gave Waverly an American name—she named
				her after the street where the family lived—she has allowed her
				daughter to become too American, and consequently contributed to
				the barrier that separates them. At the same time, however, she
				recognizes her own American characteristics and knows that she is
				no longer “fully Chinese”: during her recent visit to China, people
				recognized her as a tourist. Distressed by this, Lindo wonders what
				she has lost by the alteration. Her strategies of concealing inner
				powers and knowledge may be related to her ability to maintain what
				Waverly characterizes as a type of “two-facedness”—an ability to
				switch between a “Chinese” and an “American” face depending on whom
				she is with.

