Sofia was now twenty-six and Carla would be thirty-one
					next month, but Laura still insisted on calling all of the sisters
					"the four girls." She always felt that she had to apologize to strangers
					and their father that there were no boys in the family. Carlos always said,
					"Bulls sire good cows." The mother dressed each girl in a particular
					color, Carla in yellow, Sandra in blue, Yolanda in pink and Sofia
					in white. Sofia was jealous of her older sister's pink outfits,
					but Yolanda insisted on keeping pink for herself. The mother would sometimes
					get details about the different girls confused, but she had a particular
					story for each that she liked to tell on special occasions. Carla
					grew up to be a psychologist, and analyzed her own story for unresolved
					childhood issues. Carla's story was referred to as the story of
					the red sneakers.

When Carla was younger the family was poorer and had little money
					to spend on unnecessary things. Carla constantly begged anyway for
					a pair of red sneakers. A neighbor offered to give Carla a pair
					of white sneakers, but she only wanted red ones. Her father suggested
					that they paint the sneakers red with her mother's nail polish,
					which was what they did. Her mother told this story at Carla's wedding.
					Yolanda wanted to be a poet but ended up a schoolteacher. At a poetry
					reading, her mother described Yolanda's nervous nature—as a child,
					her hair fell out—to Yolanda's boyfriend, a fellow literature professor
					named Clive. She also told stories of how Yolanda used to recite
					poems on buses. The mother did not like to tell stories about Sandra,
					because she said she would like to forget the past. She and her
					husband had to commit Sandra to a mental hospital because her anorexia
					led to a mental breakdown. Sandra had started dieting during graduate
					school and ended up in the hospital, able only to read. She felt
					she was turning into a monkey, and had to read all the great works
					of man before she ran out of time. She felt that evolution was going
					backwards and she would eventually turn into all the animals her
					mother was trying to get her to eat.

The night Sofia was born, the family was robbed, but the
					robbers were caught and everything was returned. Her mother felt
					that Sofia was lucky for this reason. She told this story to a handsome
					stranger while watching her granddaughter in the hospital. A week
					after Sofia's daughter was born, the daughters gathered at her house
					for Christmas. Sandra had been released from the hospital for a
					month, but was still sensitive and cried easily. Sandra had a new
					boyfriend, and Yolanda's boyfriend had just gone back to his wife
					again. Sofia confessed that she made love to Otto on the fourth
					day she met him. In her mother's version of the story, they met
					in Peru rather than Colombia, and Sofia never fought with her father
					over the letters. Yolanda complained about Clive's betrayal.

Laura's perspective on each of the girls is shown through
					the stories she chooses to tell about each of them during proud
					moments. What she leaves out or changes in each of the stories also
					indicates her current attitude toward each of her daughters. She
					is able to create a reality and history for the family that is more
					comfortable and positive by redefining the more difficult moments
					her daughters have experienced.

She smoothes over Sofia's betrayal of the family, her
					running away and fighting with her father, by calling it lucky that
					she ended up with such a loving husband and a beautiful blonde baby.
					Her story about the thieves who got caught the night Sofia was born
					similarly reflects her desire to look on the brighter side of things.
					She needs this positive attitude to craft positive family stories
					out of unfortunate events.

Her story about Carla's red sneakers reflects her pride
					that her family was able to work creatively during a time a relative
					hardship in order to provide for the children. Instead of overly
					dwelling on what she and her husband were not able to offer the
					children, she highlights their resourcefulness in pleasing the children's
					every whim, no matter how trivial. Also, though one could fault
					Carla for being spoiled and ungrateful for refusing the white sneakers,
					her mother only sees the father's loving desire to give his daughter everything
					she wanted or needed.

Yolanda's career as a poet and her trouble with men also
					get a positive spin when told by her mother. Though her mother is uncomfortable
					with the sexual or romantic content of her daughter's poetry, she
					seems to ignore this when she attends readings, and behaves as a
					proud mother would. Though Yolanda was unsuccessful as a poet, her
					mother still would assure strangers at her readings that she was
					brilliant and always had been, even since she was a child. The mother's
					inability to talk about Sandra's mental illness indicates the limits
					of her ability to transform negative experiences into funny family
					stories. She has nothing positive to say about Sandra's breakdown,
					and so this story is not repeated. The doctor at the hospital is
					the only one who hears the mother's perspective on Sandra's mental
					illness, and she does not tell the story proudly, but instead tragically.
					This omission indicates the limits of motherly pride, which will
					forgive rebelliousness, selfishness, or failure, but not insanity.

