Chapters 19 & 20

Chapter 19 

Alina checks in with David on the Little Palace roof where he works to complete the mirrors that will be used to amplify her power if the Darkling attacks. His work is proceeding well with Nikolai’s help. David feels guilty about his role in placing Morozova’s collar on Alina, but he tells her it cannot be removed without drastic unforeseen consequences. He is also hurt that Genya stayed with the Darkling rather than returning to Os Alta with him. Alina tries to reassure him that they’re all doing the best they can. The next day, Nikolai and Alina attend yet another strategy meeting at the Grand Palace, where Vasily becomes increasingly restless and defiant. The ministers inform them that the First Army is running low on soldiers, so Vasily suggests they lower the draft age. Alina challenges him, and when he does not relent, an argument escalates. Nikolai and Alina try to warn Vasily about the reality of combat with an army of nichevo’ya. Vasily accuses Nikolai of being illegitimate and therefore unworthy to lead. Nikolai backs down, and on their way back to the Little Palace, Alina praises Nikolai for wanting the best for the people of Ravka.  

Os Alta celebrates the summer festival of Belyanoch. As the days lengthen, the Ravkans enjoy parades, shows, and dances. At the Little Palace, the Grisha break down social barriers and learn to work together, but Alina feels the mounting pressure of war. Mal is distant, and despite Alina’s best efforts to remain optimistic, she knows that their best hope is to prepare for evacuation and retreat. Any use of her power only makes her long for the firebird, reminding her of how much she has become like the Darkling in her lust for power. His apparitions are becoming more frequent. With David’s mirrors finally complete, Alina practices directing the Cut more broadly, and the results are spectacular. The armies and their leaders are jubilant, but Alina is distracted by Mal, who shows up hungover and bruised. Distressed and alone, she joins Nikolai and the ecstatic Grisha as they drink champagne and take joyrides on Nikolai’s new ship, the Kingfisher. Alongside the lake, Alina and Nikolai discuss their success, Vasily’s recent return and marriage proposal to Alina, and Nikolai’s uncertainty about his lineage. He wants to kiss her, but he won’t until she has forgotten Mal, so she runs away.  

Chapter 20 

Disappointed that she was nearly tempted by Nikolai, Alina contemplates writing a letter to the King and Queen begging to be excused from Nikolai’s upcoming birthday party. Alina asks Tamar to help her find Mal, so she takes Alina to the stables, where they see Mal fighting with a Grisha. Mal takes a beating but emerges victorious. Tamar stops Alina from intervening and explains that Mal fights nearly every night, and almost always wins. Alina sees Zoya in the crowd and watches as she runs to Mal. The two kiss before Mal spots Alina, who takes off into the woods. Mal follows her, and the two swap accusations before she offers to run away with him, desperate to reconcile. But when he touches her, she is thrown into the trancelike state that precedes a visit from the Darkling’s apparition. Again estranged, they return to the Little Palace, where Alina finally confesses that she sees the Darkling. Mal grabs a bottle of whiskey and retreats to his quarters. Alina awakens to caresses that she passionately returns, only to learn to her horror that she is kissing not Mal but the Darkling. She screams, but no one comes, so she goes for a long walk to clear her head.  

Alina and Mal experience turmoil that emphasizes the relationship between her growing responsibility and his downward spiral. Every day, Alina is faced with tough decisions, from battle plans to strategic retreats to the question of whether to allow young Adrik to remain. In contrast with Alina’s decisions, Mal’s problems seem petty. He is frustrated that Alina no longer has time for him and he tempts her with various entertainments, risking her safety and taking her away from her duties. He is offended by what he perceives as Alina’s aloof attitude toward him but is oblivious to the weight she carries and the psychological turmoil she is experiencing. If his attitude seems petty, his reaction to her rejection is bull-headed and self-destructive. Hurt and offended, Mal tries to distract himself with booze, cards, and fistfights. He fights Grisha to prove that he is more than some useless otkazat’sya, as if Alina were thinking of him when she made that thoughtless remark while making a statement about the pilgrims. He has always had her love and admiration, but he must realize that Alina has more pressing matters to attend to than her personal life, even if that realization means Mal must make some of the same sacrifices Alina is being forced to make. 

Nikolai and Vasily hold divergent and incompatible viewpoints on how to govern Ravka. Until now, Vasily has shown little interest in ruling, choosing instead to indulge in the perks of royalty. His obsession with horses springs from his belief that superior bloodlines make superior leaders, and his idea of a military expedition is based on hunting with servants and armed backup. These outings are more about flaunting Vasily’s wealth and power while partying in the woods than they are about engaging in practical warfare maneuvers. As the second-born and possibly illegitimate child, Nikolai eschews such beliefs and activities, preferring hands-on experience. His governance style is detail-oriented, and he listens to everyone who has a good idea. These differences come to a head when the two must find a way to shore up the First Army. Vasily’s answer is dismissive and abusive, suggesting they lower the draft age and threaten the noncompliant. Vasily sees the people of Ravka as a resource to protect himself and his assets, while Nikolai understands them as human beings. He empathizes with their hopes and fears and will not subject them to a danger he is unwilling to face himself. These traits set him apart from Vasily and make him an appealing ruler.  

As the novel nears its conclusion, both the leaders and the people of Ravka enjoy a celebration, acknowledging their accomplishments and opening the door to personal reflection. Opportunities to let one’s guard down are rare, and for good reason, given the risk of invasion. Still, David’s mirrors are a tremendous accomplishment, and the Grisha are buoyed with hope at the results of their skill combined with Alina’s power. It’s a moment that deserves a celebration. Similarly, the people of Ravka have endured much sorrow and uncertainty since the Darkling’s revolt. For them, Belyanoch is a seasonal celebration that entices them with a promise of long, sultry twilights filled with food, music, and camaraderie. These precious moments bring the people together, cementing the unions forged over the past few weeks of working together. Of course, a moment away from the drudgery of war planning also means a moment to think about what failure, or success, might mean. Nikolai’s thoughts turn to Alina, as hers turn toward Mal. Neither is pleased with their chosen partner’s reaction. In planning for war, planning for life has taken a backseat, and a celebratory moment reveals how much their personal lives are changing, perhaps forever. 

