Milkman is considered the protagonist of the novel by critics who view Song of Solomon primarily as a coming-of-age story. Milkman is born into the noble lineage of a prominent Black doctor and a wealthy landowner. He shares characteristics with heroes ranging from Odysseus, in Homer’s Odyssey, to Holden Caulfield, in J.D. Salinger’s The Catcher in the Rye. Both Odysseus and Milkman search for their ancestral homes. And like Holden Caulfield, Milkman makes his most important journey inside his soul as he grows from an egotistical young man into a compassionate adult.

Prior to this transformation, Milkman is a selfish young man who lacks any consideration for others. Although he fits in at upscale parties, Milkman feels alienated by his family, other -African-Americans of all classes, and humanity in general. He is also physically different from the people around him, since he has an undersized leg. Since Milkman is able to conceal his leg, he believes that he can also hide his emotional shortcomings. Other characters, however, are aware of Milkman’s oddities. His mother’s guests comment that he is a strange child and his schoolmates frequently tease him and beat him. Even when Milkman is a grown man, his behavior is much different from that of the rest of his community. He even walks against the flow of traffic on the street. Although Milkman is flawed, his family loves him unconditionally. Milkman does not return their love, and causes them much pain.

Milkman’s distorted personality is not entirely his fault. Morrison shows us that generations of slavery and abuse have played a part in developing Milkman’s selfish personality. Milkman’s immaturity stems directly from the enslavement and ensuing escape of his great-grandfather, Solomon. Because Solomon escaped, Milkman’s grandfather, Macon Dead I, grew up an orphan. In turn, Macon Dead I’s son, Macon Jr., witnesses white men murder his father. Macon Jr. never fully recovers from witnessing his father’s death; he becomes a greedy, vicious man who raises his own son, Milkman, to share those characteristics. The racism that has afflicted Milkman’s ancestors is partially responsible for Milkman’s own selfishness. Milkman is finally able to heal his wounds by traveling to Shalimar, the site of Solomon’s flight toward liberty.

