Owen’s wife and Hannah’s stepmother. The novel’s introspective protagonist, Hannah is shocked by Owen’s disappearance and potential involvement in illegal activity, but she proves determined, imaginative, and decisive in pursuing leads about his identity and in protecting Bailey, her stepdaughter. She and Bailey have a difficult relationship that changes for the better over the course of the novel. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Hannah Hall.

Owen’s sixteen-year-old daughter and Hannah’s stepdaughter, high school student, foil to Hannah, and co-protagonist. Bailey is a bright and moody teen who loves theater. She adores her father but has mixed feelings about Hannah. Bailey provides useful information during the course of their investigation but is easily frustrated, often venting her temper and impatience on Hannah and on people who are trying to help. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Bailey Michaels.

Hannah’s husband and Bailey’s father. Owen appears almost entirely in flashbacks in the book. Beloved by both Hannah and Bailey, he is calm and prides himself on his close relationship with his daughter, his first priority. Owen’s real name is Ethan Young, an identity he shed to protect himself and his daughter from his former father-in-law. 

Read an in-depth analysis of Owen Michaels.

Lawyer for infamous drug dealers and Owen’s former father-in-law. Nicholas is the book’s primary antagonist. He does not appear until its final chapters, but his menace hangs over much of the action. Though he is highly dangerous, he is also a loving family man who adores his wife, children, and grandchildren. 

US Marshal, a secondary antagonist. Grady is charismatic and authoritative. He and Hannah rotate between sharing confidences and withholding secrets. 

Photography editor for The San Francisco Chronicle and Hannah’s best friend. Loyal, clever, and resourceful, Jules is devoted to Hannah and Owen, even tipping him off about the impending legal raid. 

Hannah’s former fiancé, a New York City lawyer. Blunt, perceptive, and judgmental, Jake offers Hannah legal counsel after Owen flees. 

The Shop’s CEO and Owen’s boss. Avett is a corrupt executive who defrauds his investors. 

Avett’s wife and Hannah’s client. Jokingly referred to as Avett’s trophy wife, the beautiful, stylish, and self-absorbed Belle is an avid fan of Hannah’s work.

University of Texas mathematics professor and Owen’s mentor. Gruff but caring and generous, Tobias is initially prickly when Hannah and Bailey approach him, but he eventually softens. 

The Never Dry’s quick-tempered owner. Charlie turns out to be Bailey’s uncle. Though Charlie sides with his father, Owen thinks he is fundamentally trustworthy. 

Owen’s friend and husband to Patty. Carl is cowardly, dishonest, and unfaithful to his wife. 

Carl’s wife. Primarily concerned with appearances, she accuses Owen of stealing their money, unaware her husband has spent it on his mistress. 

Episcopal church secretary in Austin. Family-oriented Elenor helps Hannah and Bailey. 

Owen’s deceased first wife and college sweetheart, Bailey’s mother. Driven, loving, and determined, Katherine was a better student than Owen in college. Her murder causes the events that lead Owen and Bailey to adopt new identities. Owen fabricates her new name for her.

Professional woodturner. Though long deceased, he raised Hannah and taught her woodturning. His influence continues to guide Hannah. 

Bailey’s boyfriend. Bobby supports Bailey, but he eggs on Bailey’s negative attitude toward Hannah, and thus Owen dislikes him. 

FBI agent. Jeremy interviews Hannah about Owen’s disappearance. 

FBI agent. Naomi interviews Hannah about Owen’s disappearance.

