The protagonist of the novel. Elwood Curtis is raised by his grandmother in the Frenchtown section of Tallahassee in the 1960s after his parents abandoned him at the age of six. He is an exceptional child, a straight-A student, incredibly honest, kind, trusting, and hardworking. Elwood admires Martin Luther King, Jr. and listens to recordings of his speeches on a record player. Elwood believes that people should act justly when they are confronted by injustice. In a twist of fate, Elwood is sentenced to reform school at the Nickel Academy, an incredibly harsh sentence for unknowingly riding in a stolen car. After finding out that the school is corrupt and viciously abuses its students, Elwood vows to expose this injustice in hopes of closing the school.

Read an in-depth analysis of Elwood Curtis

Elwood’s best friend at Nickel Academy. Turner believes that people are innately cruel and that he and Elwood should try to avoid conflict. Turner took Elwood’s identity after Elwood was shot as they escaped Nickel Academy. His full name is Jack Turner, but only his mother ever called him “Jack.” After the secret graveyard is discovered, Turner, now known as Elwood, decides he must return to Florida and share the story of the Nickel boys.

Read an in-depth analysis of Jack Turner

Elwood Curtis’s grandmother. Harriet is raising her grandson, Elwood, while working in the Richmond Hotel in Tallahassee, Florida. Harriet is a very protective and strict grandmother. She keeps a close eye on Elwood, won’t let him listen to popular music, and wants him to avoid conflict. Harriet is heartbroken when Elwood is taken to Nickel Academy.

Read an in-depth analysis of Harriet

An Italian man who owns and runs the store where Elwood works as young teenager. Mr. Marconi believes in looking the other way when young kids steal from Marconi’s Tobacco & Cigars. Along with Harriet, Mr. Marconi worries that Elwood’s idealism will get him into trouble. Mr. Marconi cares a lot about Elwood’s well-being and tries to help Harriet get Elwood out of Nickel.

Read an in-depth analysis of Mr. Marconi

Elwood’s teacher and mentor. Mr. Hill is active in the Civil Rights Movement in Florida and nurtures Elwood’s interest in learning and participating in the Civil Rights Movement. 

Superintendent of Nickel Academy. He is a large, threatening white man who is viciously abusive toward the students at Nickel.

Read an in-depth analysis of Maynard Spencer

Elwood’s housemaster at Nickel Academy. Blakely is a Black man in charge of Elwood’s dormitory at the academy. Blakely encourages Elwood to learn manual labor-related skills at Nickel that he can use when he is released back into society. 

The boy in the bunk next to Elwood at Nickel Academy. Desmond teaches Elwood how to get along at Nickel so he can be released early. 

A member of the grounds crew at Nickel Academy with Elwood. Jaimie is of Mexican descent, and therefore he is constantly shifted from campus to campus at Nickel because the administration can’t decide if he is Black or white. He puts poison in Earl’s drink, hoping to kill him. 

A violent bully at Nickel Academy. The Black students cheer for him at the annual boxing match because even though he bullies them, a victory for him is victory for all Black students. Turner overhears Superintendent Spencer telling Griff he must lose the match or he will face dire consequences. Griff wins, and as a result he is beaten to death by Spencer and buried in the secret graveyard.

Read an in-depth analysis of Griff

A small boy at Nickel Academy. Corey is bullied at the academy and Elwood tries to help him. 

A white houseman at Nickel Academy. Earl gives brutal beatings to students at the building on campus called the White House. 

Elwood’s mother. She abandoned him when he was six years old. 

Elwood’s father. He became bitter after the racist treatment he faced after returning home from serving in World War II. Percy left with Evelyn, Elwood’s mother, in the middle of the night, abandoning Elwood. 

Superintendent Spencer’s boss at Nickel Academy. He takes the money that is collected during Community Service. 

Runs the “Community Service” program at Nickel Academy. Harper shoots and kills Elwood after catching up with him and Turner when they escape to Tallahassee.

Read an in-depth analysis of Harper

An abusive houseman at Nickel. Mentioned in a story by the narrator, he is the man who sexually abused Clayton Smith. 

A student at Nickel. He ran away after being sexually abused by Freddie Rich, but he was caught, beaten to death, and buried in a secret cemetery. 

Elwood’s/Turner’s wife. Millie is sympathetic and caring when Elwood shares his story and true identity. 

An ex-student of Nickel. Elwood runs into Chickie Pete in New York City. He has just left a rehab program and has no job and no place to live. Elwood has the chance to help Chickie Pete by hiring him at Ace Moving but decides not to. 

A houseman at Nickel Academy. He is one of the people who assists Spencer with beating the students at the White House. 

A state inspector who looks like John F. Kennedy. During a “surprise inspection,” Turner gives the Inspector a notebook in which Elwood has been recording what is happening at Nickel.

Griff’s opponent in the annual boxing match at Nickel Academy. 

The man who gives Elwood a ride in a stolen car. 

A bully at Nickel Academy. Black Mike punches Elwood when he tries to defend Corey.

