On the morning of the Wilkes’s party Scarlett chooses
					a dress that will show off her seventeen-inch waist. Mammy persuades
					Scarlett to eat something to discourage an unladylike appetite at
					the barbecue. Ellen cannot attend the barbeque because she must
					go over the plantation accounts with Jonas Wilkerson before he leaves
					Tara. On the road, the O’Haras meet the Tarleton women. Gerald and
					feisty Mrs. Tarleton talk about horses and the possibility of war.
					Scarlett barely listens, and even the mention of Ashley’s engagement
					fails to disrupt her daydreams of eloping with him.

All the county’s best families have arrived at Twelve
					Oaks. Scarlett notices a tall, dark, and powerfully built man staring
					at her without proper deference. His boldness thrills and shocks
					her. She learns that he is Rhett Butler, a scandalous man from an
					aristocratic family in Charleston, South Carolina. Rhett once took
					a girl out without a chaperone and then refused to marry her, though
					he should have married her after such outrageous behavior. In defense
					of his sister’s honor, the girl’s brother challenged Rhett to a
					duel. Rhett killed the brother during the duel.

Scarlett commands the largest circle of suitors and admirers
					at the barbeque, including Charles Hamilton. Charles, Melanie’s
					timid brother, showers Scarlett with awkward attention. He even
					proposes to her, although he is already Honey Wilkes’s beau. Scarlett hardly
					hears Charles, fixing her attention on Ashley. Sitting with Melanie,
					he seems oblivious to Scarlett’s admirers.

	The talk of war has attracted men young and old, who
					boast that they will defeat the Yankees in a month or less. Rhett
					contemptuously interjects that there are no cannon factories in
					the South, only a few iron foundries, and no naval power to keep
					the Southern ports open. He claims that the Yankees will prevail
					easily and excuses himself before the outraged men can respond.

	After the women and girls go upstairs to take their afternoon naps,
					Scarlett slips into the dark library to intercept Ashley. When Ashley
					enters, Scarlett confesses her love. To her dismay, he says that he
					plans to marry Melanie and tells her that she would come to hate him
					if they were married because they are too different to make a good
					match. Her pride stung, Scarlett slaps him. He walks quietly out
					of the room and she hurls a bowl at the wall, shattering it. Unbeknownst
					to Scarlett, Rhett has been lying on the couch, and he now he sits
					up and teases her about her unladylike manner. Furious and humiliated,
					Scarlett storms out with all the dignity she can muster. She goes
					upstairs and overhears Honey jealously telling Melanie that Scarlett
					is “fast.” To Scarlett’s disgust, Melanie, who can see only the
					good in people, defends Scarlett. Scarlett runs back downstairs
					just as news arrives that President Lincoln has called for troops,
					signaling the start of the Civil War. Charles spots Scarlett and
					again asks her to marry him. Seeing an opportunity to hurt Ashley
					and Honey and salvage her own pride, Scarlett accepts.

The next months pass in a blur. Scarlett and Charles marry
					just one day before Melanie and Ashley’s wedding. The men then go
					off to war and Charles dies of measles only two months later. Scarlett
					gives birth to a son and names him Wade Hampton Hamilton, after Charles’s
					commanding officer. Scarlett hates the restrictive and boring life
					of a widowed mother, hates the general excitement over the war,
					and hates that Ashley is married. She takes a trip to Atlanta to stay
					with Melanie and her aunt, Pittypat.

Rhett Butler appears in Chapter VI as a foil (a character
					whose attitudes or emotions contrast with and thereby accentuate
					those of another character) for Ashley Hamilton. Rhett plays the
					North to Ashley’s South, and the contrast between the two men deepens
					our understanding of the clashing cultural attitudes and tensions
					in the South. Blond, gentle Ashley stands for the romantic and doomed values
					of the Southern world, while dark, powerful Rhett represents the
					hardened, practical Northern world that rises up victorious after the
					war. When Scarlett desperately attempts to get Ashley’s attention,
					his chivalrous devotion to Melanie contrasts with Rhett’s ungentlemanly,
					heated stares at Scarlett. After Ashley takes Scarlett’s slap with
					dignified pain and sorrow, Rhett mercilessly teases Scarlett in
					manner unbecoming a refined Southern gentleman.

Scarlett’s interactions with Ashley and Rhett mirror the
					conflict the South is to undergo between old and new ways. The Civil
					War breaks out just as Scarlett loses Ashley to Melanie. Marrying
					Ashley, who represents the pinnacle of Southern chivalry, would
					have cemented Scarlett in the wealthy plantation lifestyle. The
					declaration of war necessitates the pair of hasty marriages and
					Scarlett’s loss of Ashley. Scarlett’s loss of Ashley therefore reflects
					the South’s impending loss of its aristocratic culture in the war.
					Ashley becomes unattainable for Scarlett, just as the life he represents
					becomes irrecoverable for the South. At this crucial moment, the
					introduction of Rhett, an outcast from aristocratic society, represents
					a new future for both Scarlett and the South. Scarlett, with her
					desire for more personal freedom than her culture allows her, finds
					herself drawn to Rhett. Later, Scarlett finds herself struggling
					to choose between the honorable Southern gentleman Ashley Wilkes
					and the opportunistic, irreverent cynic Rhett Butler, just as the
					South finds itself struggling to choose between its traditional
					culture and values based on land, inheritance, and slave-driven
					agriculture, and the new Northern way of life driven by the industrial
					economy and individual freedom.

The omniscient narrative voice shifts between a focus
					on Scarlett and a general perspective. Primarily, the narrative
					concerns itself with Scarlett’s actions and thoughts, allowing us
					to see her as other characters cannot. Upon Charles’s death, Melanie
					and Aunt Pittypat think that Scarlett is crying over the loss of
					her husband, but the narrator reveals that Scarlett is actually
					crying because of her secret passion for Ashley and her jealous
					hatred of Melanie. This shifting narrative voice also allows Mitchell
					to explain historical events that Scarlett does not understand and
					does not want to understand. It is important to understand the historical
					context of the novel’s setting, which shapes the lives of all of
					the characters. The narration also speaks from a general perspective
					in order to illustrate the difference between the sentiments typical
					of the wealthy Southern culture and those of Scarlett, which are
					often atypical. For example, when talk turns to war or patriotism,
					the narrator shows both typical Southern war fever and Scarlett’s
					unusual lack of interest. Shifting between viewpoints accentuates
					Scarlett’s independence.

