The people who have brains and courage
						come through and the ones who haven’t are winnowed out.

Will returns from a trip to Jonesboro with terrible news:
					the Scalawags and carpetbaggers have raised the taxes on Tara. Scarlett
					does not have enough money to pay the taxes, so she goes to ask
					Ashley for advice. He says he cannot help her. With self-loathing,
					he tells Scarlett he cannot bear to face reality; he misses the
					Old South. Scarlett tells Ashley that she still loves him and suddenly
					asks him to escape with her. They kiss passionately, and Ashley
					tells Scarlett that he loves her but cannot leave Melanie, for he
					loves his honor more than he loves Scarlett. Placing a clump of
					Tara’s red clay in Scarlett’s hands, Ashley tells Scarlett that
					he knows she loves Tara even more than she loves him. Scarlett remembers
					her passion for Tara and walks back to the house, vowing never to
					throw herself at Ashley again.

Jonas Wilkerson, the former overseer of Tara who now works
					for the Freedmen’s Bureau, and Emmie Slattery arrive at Tara dressed
					in opulent finery. Wilkerson announces his intention to buy the
					plantation for Emmie, and Scarlett realizes that he is the man responsible for
					raising the taxes on Tara to drive the O’Haras away. She curses the
					visitors and orders them to leave. Wilkerson snidely tells Scarlett that
					she is no longer high and mighty. Scarlett spits at him as he drives
					away in his fancy carriage. Desperate, Scarlett decides to go to
					Atlanta to try to marry Rhett Butler. The thought of marriage to Rhett
					repulses her, but she has heard of his vast funds, which he reportedly
					stole from the Confederate treasury. Scarlett cannot seduce Rhett
					looking ragged and poor, but there is no money for a new dress,
					so she makes one out of Ellen’s fine green velvet curtains. She
					decides that if Rhett does not want to marry her, she will offer
					to become his mistress if he will save Tara. Mammy agrees to help make
					the dress, on the condition that Scarlett let her act as chaperone.

Scarlett and Mammy arrive to find Atlanta burned nearly
					beyond recognition. The streets teem with blue-coated Yankee soldiers
					and freed slaves. At Aunt Pittypat’s house, Scarlett hears of the
					downfall of nearly all the prominent families in Atlanta. Rhett
					Butler has been sent to jail for allegedly killing a black man who
					insulted a white woman. Scarlett is so surprised that she scarcely
					hears Aunt Pittypat ask her whether the newly formed Ku Klux Klan
					is active around Tara.

The next morning, Scarlett visits Rhett in prison. She
					pretends to be well off and tries to seduce him. She nearly succeeds,
					but he notices the calluses on her overworked hands and guesses
					her true reasons for coming to see him. He refuses her blunt offer
					to be his mistress and tells her that he even if he wanted to give
					her money, the Yankees would trace any draft he wrote and confiscate
					all his wealth. Rhett tells her mockingly that she can attend his
					hanging, and she leaves filled with bitterness and shame.

After the Civil War ends, the events of the novel take
					place during the era of Reconstruction. Reconstruction was the transitional period
					during which the Southern states were rebuilt under a new government
					and new laws. When the war ended, the Northern-controlled Congress
					refused to grant seats to newly elected congressmen from the South
					and took full control of the Reconstruction process. The South felt
					shamed and helpless, forced to live under what it perceived as foreign
					rule by the North. For Scarlett and her friends, Reconstruction
					proves more painful than the war itself. During the war, even the
					most painful losses in battle are made bearable by the spirit of
					rebellion. After the war, however, defeat sours everyone. The South
					can no longer take pride or comfort in its spirit of rebellion.

	Three types of people dominate the novel’s portrayal
					of Reconstruction: Republican officials, Northerners in a South
					that was solidly Democratic; Scalawags, Southerners who traitorously supported
					the Republican Party after the war; and carpetbaggers, Northerners
					who came to the South after the war in search of power and profit.
					The old hierarchy turned upside down when Congress denied the right
					to vote to many Southerners who participated in the war and quickly
					granted suffrage to black men. The Republican governments in the
					South, led by Scalawags and carpetbaggers, rode roughshod over the
					once-mighty plantation owners and aristocrats of the South. Scarlett’s
					friends resent the power of the Freedmen’s Bureau, the federal agency
					designed to protect the interests of freed slaves, whom the Southerners
					view as ignorant and incompetent. Scarlett herself confronts the
					power of the government when her old employee Jonas Wilkerson, employed
					at the local Freedman’s Bureau, easily manipulates the tax code
					to increase the taxes on Tara illegally in the hope of obtaining
					the plantation for himself.

	Mitchell suggests that there are two choices for Southerners
					living under Reconstruction: they can cling to their gentility and
					pride and do as they are told, or they can fight back. Ashley, too
					moral to behave with the necessary cunning, clings to his old Southern
					gentlemanly ways. Scarlett, on the other hand, is prepared to abandon all
					the social ideals from before the war in order to save Tara. Before the
					fall of Atlanta she throws Rhett out of her house for proposing that
					she become his mistress, disgusted by his affront to her honor. Now,
					however, she rides to Atlanta willing to become his mistress in exchange
					for the three hundred dollars she needs, prioritizing matters of
					survival over matters of honor. Like all other Southerners, Scarlett
					suffers her share of shame and helplessness in the postwar years. 

	Scarlett changes after her last proclamation of love
					to Ashley. He rebuffs her once again, and finally she leaves behind
					the last of her spoiled, coquettish ways. She cannot understand
					Ashley’s self-loathing and passivity or his unwillingness to act
					on his love for her. She finally comprehends, however, that his
					integrity will always prevent him from leaving Melanie. Scarlett
					realizes that “[t]he words, hospitality and loyalty and honor, meant
					more to him than she did,” and that passion and flirtation will
					not win him. For the first time, she imagines herself in Ashley’s
					position and realizes that it pains him that they cannot act on
					their attraction. After her conversation with Ashley, Scarlett makes
					Tara the driving force in her life, which complements her resolution
					never to throw herself at Ashley again. She has abandoned all trace
					of her foolish girlhood and has become a woman on a mission.

