The narrator of “The Yellow Wallpaper” is a paradox: as she loses touch
				with the outer world, she comes to a greater understanding of the inner reality
				of her life. This inner/outer split is crucial to understanding the nature of
				the narrator’s suffering. At every point, she is faced with relationships,
				objects, and situations that seem innocent and natural but that are actually
				quite bizarre and even oppressive. In a sense, the plot of “The Yellow
				Wallpaper” is the narrator’s attempt to avoid acknowledging the
				extent to which her external situation stifles her inner impulses. From the
				beginning, we see that the narrator is an imaginative, highly expressive woman.
				She remembers terrifying herself with imaginary nighttime monsters as a child,
				and she enjoys the notion that the house they have taken is haunted. Yet as part
				of her “cure,” her husband forbids her to exercise her imagination in any way.
				Both her reason and her emotions rebel at this treatment, and she turns her
				imagination onto seemingly neutral objects—the house and the wallpaper—in an
				attempt to ignore her growing frustration. Her negative feelings color her
				description of her surroundings, making them seem uncanny and sinister, and she
				becomes fixated on the wallpaper.

As the narrator sinks further into her inner fascination with the
				wallpaper, she becomes progressively more dissociated from her day-to-day life.
				This process of dissociation begins when the story does, at the very moment she
				decides to keep a secret diary as “a relief to her mind.” From that point, her
				true thoughts are hidden from the outer world, and the narrator begins to slip
				into a fantasy world in which the nature of “her situation” is made clear in
				symbolic terms. Gilman shows us this division in the narrator’s consciousness by
				having the narrator puzzle over effects in the world that she herself has
				caused. For example, the narrator doesn’t immediately understand that the yellow
				stains on her clothing and the long “smootch” on the wallpaper are connected.
				Similarly, the narrator fights the realization that the predicament of the woman
				in the wallpaper is a symbolic version of her own situation. At first she even
				disapproves of the woman’s efforts to escape and intends to “tie her up.”

When the narrator finally identifies herself with the woman trapped in the
				wallpaper, she is able to see that other women are forced to creep and hide
				behind the domestic “patterns” of their lives, and that she herself is the one
				in need of rescue. The horror of this story is that the narrator must lose
				herself to understand herself. She has untangled the pattern of her life, but
				she has torn herself apart in getting free of it. An odd detail at the end of
				the story reveals how much the narrator has sacrificed. During her final split
				from reality, the narrator says, “I’ve got out at last, in spite of you and
				Jane.” Who is this Jane? Some critics claim “Jane” is a misprint for “Jennie,”
				the sister-in-law. It is more likely, however, that “Jane” is the name of the
				unnamed narrator, who has been a stranger to herself and her jailers. Now she is
				horribly “free” of the constraints of her marriage, her society, and her own
				efforts to repress her mind.

