“Perhaps they loved one another platonically,”
					he told himself.

Charles is devastated by Emma’s death. He plans an extravagant funeral,
					with three coffins, and arranges for his wife to be buried in her
					wedding dress. Homais and Bournisien, the priest, come to watch
					over the body with Charles; they have an argument about the value
					of prayer and Charles rages against God. As Emma is being dressed
					for the funeral, a black liquid pours out of her mouth; later, Charles
					lifts her veil to look at her face, but utters a cry of horror.
					He asks Homais to cut away a lock of her hair, and Homais does so, leaving
					a bald patch in the midst of her hair.

Rouault, having received news that his daughter was ill,
					arrives in Yonville and discovers that Emma is dead. He attends
					the funeral along with Charles and the whole town, including Lheureux
					and Hippolyte, who wears his best false leg for the occasion. Justin
					does not attend, but visits Emma’s grave in the middle of the night
					to mourn privately.

One after another of Emma’s creditors contacts Charles,
					demanding payment of a staggering sum of money. Charles attempts
					to raise it, but learns that Emma has already collected all the
					money his patients owe him. He is forced to borrow more and more,
					and to sell articles from around the house. He continues to idealize
					his wife’s memory. When Leon is engaged to a well-bred young woman, Charles
					sends him a letter of congratulations, remarking that his wife would
					have been happy for him. Even when he encounters the letter from
					Rodolphe that Emma had left in the attic, he assumes that it refers
					to a platonic affection.

	Charles lives alone with his wife’s memory. Even Homais becomes
					less intimate with him, in part because he is too busy waging a
					campaign to expel the blind beggar from the area. Homais is becoming
					an increasingly well-respected man who always keeps abreast of the
					latest developments in politics and medicine.

	One day, Charles opens Emma’s desk and discovers her
					letters from Leon and Rodolphe. He is forced to confront the fact
					that Emma was unfaithful to him. He sinks into gloom and begins
					to keep even more to himself. He has been forced to sell nearly
					everything he owns in order to keep Emma’s creditors at bay, and
					his spirit is broken. One day, he goes to Rouen to sell his horse
					to raise more money, and he meets Rodolphe. They have a drink together. Rodolphe
					expresses feelings of guilt for his part in Charles’s ruin. Charles
					tells him that he knows the truth, but does not hold a grudge against
					Rodolphe. He blames fate for Emma’s behavior.

	The next day, Charles dies in his garden. Everything
					he owned goes to the creditors, and Berthe is sent to live with
					his mother. When Charles’s mother dies, Berthe is dispatched to
					an impoverished aunt, and she is forced to work in a cotton mill.
					Homais, meanwhile, continues to thrive and is eventually awarded
					the Legion of Honor medal.

The section following Emma’s death is largely designed
					to convey the impact of the consequences Emma evaded in death but
					brought down on the people she left behind. Charles remains faithful
					to her memory even when he is consigned to a life of comparative
					poverty. When he discovers Rodolphe’s letter in the attic, he assumes
					it refers to a platonic friendship. Only Emma’s drawer full of letters
					from her lovers serves as evidence powerful and obvious enough to
					penetrate his innocent obtuseness. When Charles dies shortly after
					this revelation, the devastation of the Bovarys is complete. Berthe
					is forced to live with a lower-class aunt and to work as a common
					laborer. Emma’s aristocratic pretensions have imprisoned her child
					in a life of poverty and dependence.

	Perhaps the most powerful representation of the effect
					Emma had on the lives of those around her can be observed in Justin, Homais’s
					innocent assistant, whom she forced to play an unwitting part in
					her death. Our sense of Justin’s innocence is heightened by the
					description of him as a “child” when he weeps on Emma’s grave. Leon
					and Rodolphe sleep in their respective beds, not shedding a tear
					while Justin sobs “under the weight of an immense sorrow.” By comparing
					Emma’s lovers and their shallow, jaded insincerity with the honest
					involuntary passion of an innocent, Flaubert shows how hollow and
					bereft of sincere emotion Emma’s love affairs have been.

	In terms of narrative structure, the final chapter of Madame Bovary is
					symmetrical with the first. Emma is absent from both the first and
					the last chapters of the book, which focus instead on Charles. Her
					absence reminds us that life continues without her, reducing her
					life to just one among many. And, just as the book began not with
					Charles but with an anonymous third party, it ends with Homais,
					who has played only an occasional part in all of Emma’s dramas.
					The last sentence of the book describes the honors accorded Homais,
					that torchbearer of bourgeois mediocrity, reminding us again that Madame
						Bovary is a tragedy of class.

