Morning, Confederate camp west of Gettysburg.
					General Robert E. Lee rises. He is having some slight heart troubles
					and is taking things easy. He discusses the military situation with
					his aide, Taylor, noting that General Stuart has not reported back
					with the position of the Union army, thus leaving Lee blind. Several
					of Lee’s officers want Stuart to be court-martialed for his failure
					to report on the Union army, but Lee is fond of Stuart, who has
					been an excellent soldier until now. Lee tells General Longstreet
					that he is Lee’s most valuable officer and must not risk
					himself near the front in battle. Longstreet reports that the new
					commander of the Union army is George Meade. Longstreet adds that
					he believes Union cavalry have occupied Gettysburg. He suggests
					that the Confederate army swing around to the southeast of Gettysburg
					and put itself between the Union army and Washington, D.C., cutting
					the Union soldiers off from the capital and forcing them to attack.
					Lee is annoyed by Longstreet’s stubborn advocacy of defensive tactics
					and refuses to use them. As the two ride out to start the day’s
					march, they hear the sound of artillery fire in the distance.

Morning, Gettysburg. Confederate forces begin
					to attack General Buford’s cavalry. Buford leads his men on foot,
					like infantry. After the initial Confederate attack, Buford sends
					word of the attack to General Reynolds, who is heading toward Gettysburg with
					his infantry troop. Buford fervently hopes that Reynolds arrives
					at Gettysburg before it is too late—Buford has lost battles before
					while waiting for infantry to arrive. Buford orders his cannoneers
					to fire several shots. The Confederate infantry attack begins. Buford
					rides back and forth among his soldiers, directing the battle. The
					Confederates outnumber the Union soldiers, but the Confederates
					have been expecting a small militia, and their early attacks are
					easily repulsed by Buford’s men. Soon, however, the Confederates
					are attacking in droves, and the tide begins to turn. When Buford
					thinks he can hold out no more, Reynolds arrives and provides needed
					relief for Buford’s brigade. Just as Reynolds’s men move in, Reynolds
					is shot and killed. The attack continues without a commander, and Buford
					rides out to scout the other hills and make sure no Confederate
					forces are moving in on them.

Robert E. Lee is one of the most famous figures in the
					Civil War. A beloved general and the darling of Virginia society,
					Lee is fifty-seven years old at the time of the battle, and has
					less than a decade to live. He is having heart trouble, which eventually
					kills him. Some historians speculate that Lee may have suffered
					a mild heart attack during the Battle of Gettysburg, and Shaara
					works from that idea. This chapter also introduces the dynamic between
					Lee and Longstreet that will occupy much of their interaction: Longstreet
					fervently tries to persuade Lee to use defensive tactics against
					the Union army, and Lee constantly refuses to do so.


The Killer Angels probes the boundary
					between history and fiction. Shaara does not differentiate between
					what is factual in his writing and what is historical. The point
					of his novel is not to give a history of the Battle of Gettysburg.
					Rather, the novel is imaginative: it speculates on what it might
					have been like to participate in the battle and what the generals
					might have been thinking and feeling as it proceeded. Nonetheless,
					Shaara’s work is carefully researched and is usually faithful to
					the events of the war. Shaara’s attitudes toward his characters
					reflect his own interpretations of the historical figures. Longstreet
					emerges as one of Shaara’s most developed characters in the book.
					Shaara is very sympathetic to the idea of a visionary Longstreet
					who understands the nature of “modern warfare” and is years ahead
					of his time in tactics.

	Historians—particularly D. Scott Hartwig in A
						Killer Angels Companion—have argued that this depiction
					of Longstreet is debatable, since Longstreet “offered no imaginative
					or dramatic changes in tactics during the war,” and only became
					an advocate for defensive tactics after watching the Confederate
					troops crush the Union troops at Fredericksburg by hiding behind
					stone walls and in trenches. Hartwig claims that Lee knew just as
					well as Longstreet how to fight the Civil War using modern weaponry. While
					a defensive posture might have worked for Lee at the Battle of Gettysburg,
					it is by no means certain that it would have, and Shaara’s portrayal
					of Longstreet as a man ahead of his time is not necessarily accurate.

	The developing dynamic between Longstreet
					and Lee suggests that their relationship is similar to that between
					a father and a son. Even though Lee is only eleven years
					older, Longstreet treats his commander with great respect and, when
					Lee is in pain or fails, with great sympathy. Ultimately, no matter
					how much he might disagree, Longstreet defers to Lee’s decisions. Shaara,
					like many historians, places the blame for the Confederate defeat
					at Gettysburg squarely on Lee’s shoulders, as Lee himself does.
					In the process, Shaara removes much of the blame that Longstreet should
					have shouldered, making Lee’s failure that much more tragic: the
					great, legendary General Lee, the brilliant tactician, fails to
					win a battle that his best general could have won for him. Longstreet’s
					defensive tactics would not necessarily have worked, and Lee’s tactical
					decisions were not certain to fail. Some historians, like Hartwig, argue
					that many of Lee’s tactics were quite sound.

	The battle actually begins in Chapter 2 when
					the Confederates attack Buford’s two cavalry brigades, who have
					dismounted and are fighting on foot. Buford’s troops are to the
					west of Gettysburg, blocking all the hills, including Seminary Ridge.
					Here, history provides Shaara with some high drama: General Reynolds was
					indeed killed by a sniper almost immediately after arriving with
					his men in Gettysburg. The loss of Reynolds robbed the Union forces
					of one of their best officers. Fortunately, Reynolds had ordered
					his troops into position before being shot, and the Union forces
					succeeded in preventing the Confederates from capturing the high
					ground.

