Dark, dashing, and scandalous, Rhett Butler brings excitement
				to Scarlett’s life and encourages her impulse to change and succeed. Thrown
				out of both West Point and his aristocratic Charleston family for
				dishonorable behavior, Rhett, like Scarlett, goes after what he wants
				and refuses to take ‘no’ for an answer. He earns his fortune through
				professional gambling, wartime blockade-running, and food speculation,
				behavior that earns him the contempt and even hatred of what he
				terms the Old Guard—the old Southern aristocracy. Rhett sees through
				hypocrisy and self-delusion, horrifying people by cutting down their
				egos and illusions with agility and pleasure.

	Whereas Ashley cannot face reality and change, Rhett
				thrives on both. Because of his opportunism, Rhett symbolizes the
				New South. However, as the novel progresses, we see that Rhett does
				care about the Old South. At two critical points in the novel, Rhett
				abandons Scarlett to commit himself to the Old South. First, he
				leaves Scarlett in hostile territory and joins the Confederate army.
				Second, at the end of the novel he leaves Scarlett and goes in search
				of remnants of the Old South. This sentimentality complicates Rhett’s
				character and reveals that he is partially motivated by emotion.
				Ultimately, Rhett symbolizes pragmatism, the practical acceptance
				of the reality that the South must face in order to survive in a
				changed world. He understands that the U.S. government has overhauled
				the Southern economy and that the old way of life is gone forever.
				He adapts to the situation masterfully, but he does not fully abandon
				the idealized Southern past. 

Rhett falls in love with Scarlett, but, despite their
				eventual marriage, their relationship never succeeds because of
				Scarlett’s obsession with Ashley and Rhett’s reluctance to express
				his feelings. Because Rhett knows that Scarlett scorns men she can
				win easily, Rhett refuses to show her she was won him. He mocks
				her, argues with her, and eventually resorts to cruelty and indifference
				in order to win her. But his fondness for her is evident in his
				support of her, as he encourages her to shun social customs and
				gives her money to start her own business.

