Richard’s most essential characteristic is his tremendous
belief in his own worth and capabilities. This belief frequently
renders him willful, stubborn, and disrespectful of authority, putting
him at odds with his family and with those who expect him to accept
his degraded position in society. Because almost everyone in Richard’s life
thinks this way, he finds himself constantly punished for his nonconformity
with varying degrees of physical violence and emotional isolation.
Though Richard shows signs of insecurity, inferiority, and shame
around some whites, his self-assurance seems largely invulnerable,
and his punishing childhood only serves to convince him of his own
right to succeed in the world. Moreover, Richard’s difficult and
isolating experiences as a child fuel his intensely powerful imagination,
his love of reading and writing, and his will to make his life feel
meaningful through writing about his environment.

	Wright paints himself in several different shades throughout
the course of Black Boy. As a young boy, Richard
is simply unable to believe the publicly accepted notions that his
blackness, lack of religion, and intellectual curiosity make him
inherently flawed. Rather, we find in Richard a character determined
to live according to his own principles and willing to live with
the consequences. This strong-willed nature, however, contrasts
with Richard’s powerless position in society—the low social status
that comes with being black and poor. Starting off removed from
society and his family, Richard must learn to educate himself. Much
of this education stems from his experiences—in the homes of sharecroppers,
as a black in the Jim Crow South, as a resident of the cramped apartments
of Depression-era Chicago. There are clearly negative aspects to
the character Richard develops, as we see him lie, steal, and turn violent
numerous times in the book. In a sense, he is a victim of his poor
upbringing—in both the black and white communities in the South;
as a victim, he becomes contaminated by the oppressive forces working
against him.

Despite his flaws, Richard remains intensely concerned
with humanity, both in a universal sense and in the context of his
concern for the individual people he meets on his journey. In this
way, Richard overcomes the negative, debilitating, isolating aspects
of his environment and channels them into a love for other people.
He is an outsider who feels little connection to other people, yet
who cares for these people nonetheless. Richard’s traits do not
exist in perfect harmony: at certain points, one trait will seem
to dominate, only to give way to other traits at other times. However,
because the character of Richard Wright so convincingly contains
all these traits, albeit in imbalance, he has a self-contradictory
appeal that transcends the simple biographical facts of his life.

