In October 1805, the Russian army,
					led by General Kutuzov, is settled near Braunau in Austria, the
					home of their ally, the Archduke Ferdinand. The soldiers are clean
					and orderly despite holes in their boots. Pierre’s friend Dolokhov,
					demoted to the ranks, is criticized for inappropriate clothing,
					and he becomes resentful. The one-eyed General Kutuzov inspects
					the troops accompanied by his adjutant, Andrew Bolkonski. Kutuzov
					promises Dolokhov a promotion should he distinguish himself in battle.
					In conference with the Austrian commander, Kutuzov insincerely expresses
					regret that the tsar has not ordered the Russian troops to join
					the Austrian forces. Bolkonski rebukes a Russian who jokes about
					a recent major Austrian defeat.

At the Russian hussar (light cavalry) camp near Braunau,
					Nicholas Rostov and his commanding officer, Denisov, enjoy leisure
					time until a fellow officer, Telyanin, steals Denisov’s purse and
					Nicholas demands it back. Nicholas accuses Telyanin publicly, which
					earns Nicholas charges of insubordination from his superior. Nicholas refuses
					to apologize.

The Russian troops retreat over a river, pursued by the
					enemy. The military scene is chaotic. A Russian officer, Nesvitski,
					is nearly crushed on a bridge as the troops march over it, and he
					hears snatches of their various conversations. He does not recognize
					a cannonball when it splashes in the water. Orders are misunderstood.
					The Russian hussars, including Nicholas, succeed in burning the
					bridge under enemy fire, although three Russians are shot. The commanding
					officers somewhat selfishly weigh the lost lives against praise
					for the platoon.

Despite rumors of Napoleon’s retreat, the French troops
					are gaining ground against Kutuzov’s beleaguered Russian forces.
					Andrew Bolkonski is sent to the Austrian government-in-exile with
					news of a recent Russian victory. Along the way he gives money to
					wounded soldiers and dreams of the battle. Disappointed that the
					Austrian Minister of War seems more affected by the death of Schmidt,
					an Austrian general, than by the Russian victory, Andrew then chats with
					his friend Bilibin, a highly regarded diplomat. Andrew shares his
					astonishment that the blundering Austrians are not appreciating Kutuzov’s
					victories. Andrew reflects that the recent victory is not significant
					compared to the loss of Vienna to the French. Bilibin speculates
					darkly about the fact that Austria is considering a separate peace
					with the French, though Andrew refuses to believe this rumor. Andrew
					and Bilibin’s officer friends chat about women and Andrew’s upcoming
					meeting with the Austrian emperor. The officers advise Andrew to
					praise the emperor’s supply of provisions for the Russian army,
					even if he must lie in order to do so.

During the meeting, the emperor, pleased with Andrew’s
					news, confers state honors upon him. Returning from official visits, Andrew
					is surprised to find that Napoleon is again pursuing the Russian
					troops. Bilibin advises Andrew to stay with him rather than heroically
					join his own army on the move. Andrew, however, staunchly remains
					faithful to his army. But when he watches the Russian soldiers on
					the road, rudely refusing right of way to a helpless doctor’s wife,
					he muses that the army is a chaotic mob. Meeting with Kutuzov, Andrew
					expresses his wish to join the imperiled battalion commanded by
					Prince Bagration. Kutuzov warns that the battalion is doomed, but
					Andrew says that is exactly why his presence is needed there. Meanwhile,
					Kutuzov tricks the French commander Murat into believing a ploy,
					ultimately weakening the French and earning Murat a chastising letter
					from Napoleon.

A battle looms. Andrew witnesses Dolokhov chatting and
					laughing with the enemy across the battle lines. Drinking vodka,
					the troops muse upon life and death. The battle begins. Andrew rides
					beside Prince Bagration, noting that Bagration reacts to news of
					events on the field as though he had planned for them to happen,
					and that his manner improves the morale of all who speak to him.
					The two men encounter many wounded soldiers at a site where a Russian
					detachment has been overwhelmed. The commanding officer begs Bagration
					to turn back, but Bagration refuses.

Meanwhile, in the hussar lines, Nicholas Rostov is awaiting
					his first battle impatiently. Suddenly he is unsure who the enemy
					is, and whether he is wounded, as he feels blood and is pinned down
					by his fallen horse. Nicholas sees the enemy approach and cannot
					believe that they would want to kill him, a person whom everyone
					likes. He awaits aid and dreams of home.

Dolokhov is wounded while capturing an enemy officer,
					and wishes to be remembered for his heroism. Andrew wanders among the
					wounded soldiers. One soldier asks for water and wonders whether
					he is to die like a dog. Andrew saves a captain named Tushin from
					wrongful accusations of incompetence Bagration has levied, but he
					is soured by the experience.

Back in Moscow, Pierre finds his former critics suddenly
					friendly now that he has become the wealthy Count Bezukhov. He naïvely believes
					these sycophants to be sincere. Vasili Kuragin has taken Pierre
					in hand with the ulterior motive of marrying him to his daughter,
					Helene, and borrowing forty thousand rubles. Anna Pavlovna Scherer
					invites Pierre to a party and sings the praises of Helene, whose
					beauty overwhelms Pierre even though he is aware she is stupid.
					Over time, Pierre’s infatuation with Helene deepens until he is
					convinced that marriage is inevitable. At Helene’s name day party,
					Vasili convinces everyone, including the dazed Pierre himself, that
					Pierre and Helene are engaged. They are married shortly afterwards.
					Vasili sends Prince Nicholas Bolkonski word that he will soon visit
					with his son Anatole, his ulterior motive being to arrange a marriage
					with Mary, the prince’s daughter. The prince disapproves of Vasili’s
					character and becomes grumpy.

As the idea of courtship appears before her, Mary is plagued
					by religious concerns about her desires of the flesh. She is overwhelmed by
					Anatole’s beauty and self-possession. The prince, not wanting his daughter
					to get married and leave him, doubts that Anatole is good enough
					for Mary. Anatole does, however, charm the women—Mary, Lise, and
					especially Mademoiselle Bourienne. The prince ultimately decides
					to give his daughter total freedom in choosing her husband. Finally,
					Mary decides to remain with her father, rejecting Anatole.

The Rostovs receive a letter from Nicholas, telling of
					his injuries and of his promotion to officer rank. The count and
					countess both weep, as does Sonya. The countess muses on Nicholas’s
					growth from infancy to manhood.

Meanwhile, back at the front, Nicholas enjoys a free existence,
					falling into debt and going to restaurants. He is joined by his
					friend Boris and by the officer Berg. Nicholas is a bit contemptuous
					of Berg’s diplomatic tendencies, as he prefers more blatant acts
					of heroism. Andrew joins Nicholas and the others, and Nicholas throws some
					thinly veiled insults at Andrew about being a distant officer far from
					the fray of battle. Later, the Austrian and Russian emperors review
					their troops together, with Tsar Alexander winning cheers from his
					men. Nicholas feels a wish to die for the tsar, and the men are
					inspired to fight valiantly.

The next day, Boris acts on Berg’s advice and sets out
					to seek patronage from Andrew. Boris finally finds Andrew, who kindly agrees
					to talk to him about becoming an adjutant (a staff officer). It is
					announced that the Russian and Austrian strategists have decided to
					attack the French, and Boris feels elated that he is in such important
					company. Nicholas also is overjoyed at having been reviewed by the
					tsar, with whom he is so fascinated he almost seems to be in love.
					Talks with Napoleon are underway, and Andrew learns from the Russian
					emissary that Napoleon fears a large battle. The plan remains to
					attack the French at Austerlitz, though General Kutuzov fears defeat.
					At the council of war, the commanders disagree and hesitate. Nonetheless,
					Andrew relishes the glory that he feels will come. Riding on horseback
					that night, Nicholas dozes and thinks of Natasha, but he is awakened
					by shots nearby. It is clear that action will follow soon. The next
					morning, the Russian troops advance, blinded by a fog and unsure
					whether they are in the midst of the French.

Rostov’s detachment is frustrated to learn that they are
					late, due to a mix-up over misunderstood orders. Unbeknownst to
					the -Russians, the French forces are nearby—in fact, Napoleon himself expressionlessly
					watches the Russians take their position. The tsar reproaches Kutuzov
					for delaying the battle, but Kutuzov responds that a battle is more
					serious than an official parade, and that being late is not as important
					as being strong. Suddenly the French appear closer than expected,
					and Kutuzov is wounded in the cheek. Andrew is wounded by a French
					bludgeon, and he falls to the ground in an attitude of bliss and
					peace, thanking God that all falsehood is vanishing around him.
					Meanwhile, on the right flank, Bagration’s troops, including Nicholas,
					have not started fighting yet. The charge begins, with Rostov in
					it. All but eighteen of the officers die in the attack. Boris rides
					up, but Nicholas rides away, seeking the tsar with a message. Confusion
					reigns. The possibility of defeat is too horrible for Nicholas to contemplate.

Nicholas, still searching for Kutuzov or the tsar in the
					village of Pratzen, is told that the tsar has been transported away
					wounded. Nicholas cannot believe it, and he hears conflicting reports. Despairing,
					he sees the dead in the fields. He is surprised to find the tsar
					alone in a field, but he is too shy to address him, so he rides
					on. Later, Nicholas comes back to find the tsar gone. The cannon
					fire continues, and more men fall. Meanwhile, Andrew, lying in Pratzen, is
					unsure where he is and delirious after receiving his wound. Napoleon
					rides by and comments on Andrew, but even this hardly affects him.
					When Napoleon later speaks to the Russian prisoners of war, he is
					courteous and complimentary toward Andrew.

Perhaps the foremost idea in these chapters is the disillusionment
					of idealists. Tolstoy emphatically underlines the split between
					the grand, noble, or romantic ideas characters hold about concepts
					such as national unity, war, and leadership, and the disappointing
					reality these characters experience later.

Tolstoy opens Book Two by continuing to deflate the grand notion
					of the unity of the Russian nation, deepening his exploration of
					the internal divisions within Russia that he had implied in Book One.
					We see a microcosm of these internal rifts in the barracks, as our
					first glimpse of a military conflict is not between Russians and Frenchmen,
					but among Russians themselves: the officer Telyanin steals a purse
					and Nicholas accuses him of thievery. We wonder about the strength
					of national unity if the Russians fight among themselves even on
					the battlefield. Similarly, when the first two Russian casualties
					are reported, there is talk of how the detachment may be awarded
					a medal, with no mention of mourning the fellow Russians who have
					fallen. Even the scene in which the officer Nesvitski is stuck on
					the bridge—blocked not by the enemy but by the movement of his own
					troops—hints that Russians can be their own worst enemies, perhaps
					even as much as the French are.

Disillusionment also occurs on the level of individual
					characters. Andrew starts off with high-minded notions of heroism,
					giving money to wounded soldiers from his own pocket, and believing
					that the Austrian commanders would appreciate the import of a Russian victory.
					But during his mission to the Austrian general, Andrew discovers
					that the Austrians greet news of Kutuzov’s triumphs with little
					more than indifference, despite a series of Austrian blunders that should
					leave them very grateful for a Russian success. This sudden understanding
					that recognition and credit are not always given fairly marks the
					start of Andrew’s initiation into the realities of war, the beginning
					of a deadened attitude that he never truly shakes throughout the
					rest of the novel.

Tolstoy uses the battle scenes in this section primarily
					to explore leadership, especially the fact that men who are revered
					as super-human heroes have the same mundane, everyday aspects as
					common men. Both the French and the Russian sides of the battle
					make certain men into myths. Anna Pavlovna has already referred
					to Napoleon as the “Antichrist,” and here the French emperor exhibits a
					mythical aspect: our first image of Napoleon is of him standing immobile
					and expressionless, as if he were a statue rather than a living
					man. Tsar Alexander is revered in similarly transcendent ways, and
					Nicholas is amazed, when he finds the tsar standing alone in a field,
					that such a great figure could appear so ordinary. When the tsar
					hesitates in his review of the Russian troops, Nicholas is surprised,
					thinking that a great man never hesitates. This close proximity
					of high commanders to lowly infantrymen produces an environment
					in which great leadership appears especially valuable. Indeed, we
					see that a revered leader like Alexander can inspire his troops
					to acts of heroic self-sacrifice. However, that same proximity of
					the great and the lowly also has the potential to disillusion those in
					the rank and file, making them realize that their mythical heroes are,
					in many aspects, simply men just like themselves.

