The young, gentle Maria catches Robert Jordan’s eye from
				the moment he meets her. She exudes a natural, glowing beauty, despite the
				fact that she has recently suffered a traumatic rape and has had most
				of her hair shorn off. Though she is vulnerable and lays her emotions
				bare, she exhibits an inner strength, determination, and resilience
				that enable her to bear her difficult circumstances. Some critics
				contend that Hemingway intends Maria to represent the land of Spain
				itself, ravaged by the warring forces beyond her comprehension,
				yet always enduring, beautiful, and loving. Indeed, Hemingway frequently
				uses earth imagery to describe Maria, comparing her hair to the
				“golden brown of a grain field” and her breasts to “small hills.”
				In this light, Robert Jordan’s closeness with Maria mirrors his
				closeness with Spain, his adopted country.

As Robert Jordan’s love interest, Maria provides the impetus
				for his personal development from an unfeeling thinker and doer
				to a romantic individual. In his conversations with General Golz
				and with Maria early in the novel, Robert Jordan reveals his belief
				that he does not have time for women during the war. Even after
				Robert meets Maria, he remains closed to extreme emotion or romance. Though
				in love with her, Robert Jordan still shuts her out whenever he
				must think about his work. However, by the end of the novel, Robert
				Jordan thanks Maria for everything that she has taught him and faces
				the day of his mission noting that he has integrated his commitments
				to work and to love. Maria, determined to embrace their love fully,
				teaches Robert Jordan how to resolve his tensions between love and
				work.

Some critics of For Whom the Bell Tolls consider
				Maria a weak link in the novel because her characterization depends
				so heavily on the effect she has on Robert Jordan rather than on
				her own motivations and conflicts. These critics argue that Maria’s
				submissiveness and the speed with which her affair with Robert Jordan
				progresses are unrealistic. They assert that Maria is not a believable
				character but rather a stereotype or the embodiment of a male fantasy.
				Some feminist critics have blanched at Hemingway’s treatment of
				Maria’s rape, especially at the fact that sexual intercourse with
				Robert Jordan appears to heal Maria instantaneously. But although
				Maria does come across as a rather static character, this flatness
				renders her symbolic importance all the more apparent. Maria’s lovely
				image endures beyond the last pages of the novel, an emblem of a
				land that maintains its beauty, strength, and dignity in the face
				of forces that threaten to tear it apart.

