David is old and bed-ridden, and his son Adonijah proclaims
					himself king with the help of David’s commander Joab and the priest, Abiathar.
					Hearing this news, David instructs the prophet Nathan to anoint
					David’s son, Solomon, as king. The people rally behind Solomon in
					a grand procession to the royal throne. Before dying, David charges
					Solomon to remain faithful to God and his laws. Solomon solidifies
					his claim to the throne by killing Joab, Adonijah, and the remaining
					dissenters from David’s reign. He also makes an alliance with Egypt
					by marrying the pharaoh’s daughter.

Because Solomon carefully obeys God’s laws, God appears
					to him in a dream and offers to grant the new king one wish. Solomon asks
					for wisdom to govern with justice and to know the difference between
					right and wrong. God is so impressed with Solomon’s humble request
					that he promises Solomon the additional gifts of wealth and long
					life. As a result, Solomon lives in great opulence and his empire
					stretches from Egypt to the Euphrates River. He earns international
					fame for his wise sayings and scientific knowledge.

With his vast resources, Solomon builds an elaborate
					temple to God as well as a palace for himself in Jerusalem. Construction begins
					exactly four hundred and eighty years after Israel’s exodus from
					Egypt. Solomon conscripts thousands of laborers for the work and
					imports materials from neighboring countries. The Temple is lined
					with gold and features large, hand-sculpted angels and pillars. Solomon
					places the Ark of the Covenant inside, and all of Israel gathers
					for the dedication. After sacrificing herds of animals on the altar,
					Solomon prays for God’s blessing on the Temple. God appears to Solomon
					and promises to dwell in the Temple so long as Solomon and the Israelites
					are obedient to his laws. If they are not, God will remove his presence
					from the Temple, destroying both the temple and the nation.

Solomon’s success continues until he marries many foreign women.
					They influence him to worship and erect altars to foreign deities.
					God is infuriated and tells Solomon that he will dismember the kingdom.
					God will tear away all of the tribes from Solomon’s kingdom except
					for one, Judah. God allows the tribe of Judah to remain since Solomon
					is David’s son. Following God’s declaration, a prophet meets one
					of Solomon’s officials, Jeroboam, with a cloak torn into twelve
					pieces, representing the twelve tribes of Israel. The prophet hands
					Jeroboam ten of the twelve pieces and explains that God has chosen
					him to rule these selected tribes as Israel’s new king.

Solomon dies, and his son Rehoboam assumes the
					throne. Led by Jeroboam, the people gather before the young king
					to request that Rehoboam treat them more kindly than Solomon did
					during his reign. Rehoboam is headstrong and refuses, threatening
					to punish and enslave the people. The Israelites unite in rebellion,
					cursing the tribe of Judah and eluding Rehoboam’s attempts to forcefully
					subdue them. They head north, where they crown Jeroboam king of
					Israel in the city of Shechem. Israel splits into two kingdoms:
					the kingdom of Israel in the north, and the kingdom of Judah in
					the south.

To distinguish the new, separate kingdom of Israel from
					the old kingdom in Jerusalem, Jeroboam erects altars and shrines
					to golden calves throughout the northern land. The Israelites worship
					the idols, and the Levite priests, formerly devoted to God, serve
					them as well. One day, Jeroboam’s son is ill, and his wife approaches
					a prophet to seek guidance. The prophet warns that Jeroboam’s household
					will be destroyed and that Israel will eventually lose control of
					the promised land because of Jeroboam’s abhorrent practices. One
					generation later, Jeroboam’s entire family is slaughtered when another
					Israelite takes the throne by force.

Meanwhile, King Rehoboam also erects altars
					and shrines to idols in Judah, even authorizing male and female
					prostitution in these shrines. The two kingdoms, northern and southern,
					continue to fight each other. After Rehoboam and Jeroboam die, the
					narrator recounts the story of all the succeeding kings in each
					kingdom, summarizing each king’s reign by whether he does good or
					evil. Almost all of Israel’s northern kings commit great evil, expanding
					on the practices of their fathers. Some of the southern kings in
					Jerusalem try to revive obedience to God, but none of them bans
					the worship of foreign gods in Judah.

With the help of his wife Jezebel, Ahab, northern Israel’s
					most wicked king, spreads cult worship of the god Baal throughout
					the northern lands. In response, a prophet named Elijah emerges
					and informs Ahab that God will curse the land with a great
					drought. Elijah leads a secluded life on the outskirts of civilization.
					Ravens bring Elijah food and he performs miracles for the local
					people. After three years of drought, Queen Jezebel begins a campaign
					to murder all of God’s prophets in the land. Elijah publicly confronts
					Ahab, demanding that the Israelite people profess allegiance to
					either God or Baal. The people do not respond. Elijah challenges
					the priests of Baal to a contest to see whose god can miraculously
					set an unlit animal sacrifice on fire. Despite animated prayer and
					self-mutilation, the priests of Baal are unable to ignite their
					altar. Elijah soaks his altar in water three times, and, when he
					prays, God engulfs the altar in flames.

Elijah flees from the belligerent Jezebel into the desert.
					He complains to God that, despite his earnest service, the Israelites
					continue to be disobedient. God promises to show himself to Elijah.
					Elijah is surrounded by wind, earthquakes, and fire, but none of
					these, we are told, is God. Instead, Elijah hears a soft whisper
					amidst the storm, and he recognizes that this is God. Encouraged,
					Elijah returns to civilization where he appoints a new man, Elisha,
					to be his apprentice and to eventually succeed him as prophet.

One day, Ahab and Jezebel steal a man’s vineyard
					by slandering the man’s name in public until the citizens stone
					the man. Elijah finds Ahab in the vineyard and declares that because
					of their murderous deeds, Ahab and Jezebel will die and dogs will
					lick up their blood. Soon after, King Ahab makes a rare pact with
					the king of Judah. The two lead their united forces against the
					Arameans who are occupying Israel’s borders. Ahab is killed and
					bleeds to death in his chariot. When the chariot is cleaned after
					battle, dogs gather to lick his blood.

Not long after, Elijah is miraculously taken up into
					heaven by a flaming chariot, never to return, while Elisha looks
					on. Elisha assumes Elijah’s role as prophet, acting as a cryptic
					doomsayer to Israel’s kings while performing miracles for the common
					folk. Elisha helps a barren woman become pregnant, and when her
					young son suddenly dies, Elisha brings the boy back to life by lying
					on top of him. He guides the king of Israel in eluding the Aramean
					invaders from the north by plaguing the enemy troops with blindness.

Elisha initiates a coup to cut off Ahab and
					Jezebel’s dynasty by secretly anointing a military commander, Jehu,
					to overthrow the throne. Jehu descends on the city where the current
					king, who is Ahab’s son, and Judah’s king are visiting each other.
					The men of the city rapidly defect to Jehu’s side. Jehu overcomes
					the kings on horseback and shoots them with an arrow, decrying their
					witchcraft and idolatry in the process. Entering the city, Jezebel
					calls out seductively to Jehu from a window. The men of the city
					throw her out the window, and Jehu’s horses trample her. The dogs
					eat her dead body, fulfilling Elijah’s prophecy. After killing the
					rest of Ahab’s family, Jehu invites all the priests of Baal to an
					assembly and murders them. He wipes out the Baal cult in Israel, but
					he does not forbid the worship of other gods.

The narrator continues the chronological account
					of Israel and Judah’s kings. Each of Israel’s kings is more evil
					than the previous, and Northern Israel gradually loses its territories
					to Assyrian pressure from the northeast. Assyria finally invades
					the northern kingdom of Israel entirely and captures the Israelites,
					removing them to Assyria. God’s presence leaves the people of Israel,
					and scattered Near-Eastern groups populate the promised land, worshipping
					their own gods.

A handful of Judah’s kings make a brave attempt
					at reform in the southern kingdom. Two kings embark on repairing
					the decaying Temple in Jerusalem. When Hezekiah assumes the throne,
					he destroys all of the altars and idols in Judah—the first such
					policy since Rehoboam introduced the idols into the land. With the
					help of the great prophet Isaiah, Judah thwarts heavy economic and
					military threats from Assyria. Finally, Judah’s king Josiah directs
					a national program of spiritual renewal. He reads the Laws of Moses
					in front of all the people, and the people reaffirm their commitment
					to God’s covenant, celebrating the Passover for the first time in
					centuries. Despite these attempts to turn the religious tide in
					Judah, however, evil rulers regain power after Josiah’s death. The
					king of Babylon invades the southern kingdom of Israel, burning
					Jerusalem and destroying the Temple. Like their northern brothers,
					the people of Judah are exiled, settling in Babylon far away from
					their homeland.

The two volumes of Kings continue the story of
					Israel’s tumultuous monarchy begun in Genesis and continued in the
					books of Samuel. The history spans almost four hundred years of
					events in ancient Israel. From the beginning of Solomon’s
					reign in around 965 b.c. to
					the fall of the northern and southern kingdoms in 722 b.c. and 567 b.c.,
					respectively, the nation of Israel dominates the international affairs
					of the Near East. As a result, many of the events described in the
					biblical account of Israel’s divided kingdom can be authenticated
					historically. However, the authors of Kings do not simply list Israel
					and Judah’s kings, but arrange their stories in a way that highlights
					the direct connection between Israel’s religious infidelity and
					its radical political demise.

Solomon’s temple is a monolithic symbol that changes
					to reflect the changing fortunes of the Israelites. The author interprets
					the temple’s construction as a sign that Israel, the land originally
					promised to Moses, has arrived. By noting that Solomon builds it
					in “the four hundred and eightieth year after the Israelites came
					out of the land of Egypt,” the narrator suggests that all of Israel’s
					struggles to enter and conquer the promised land have prepared this
					moment (6:1). The
					Temple’s large, solid structure is a physical manifestation of Israel’s
					secure position in the land. God proves a spiritual manifestation of
					Israel’s security when he promises to reside in the temple, placing
					his “name there forever” (9:3).
					The fact that the Temple is a man-made object that can decay foreshadows
					the eventual spiritual decay of Israel. Furthermore, the importance
					of a physical object to Solomon and the people contrasts with the
					importance in earlier biblical books of incorporeal spiritual elements.
					The temple also reflects the downfall of Israel. After the author
					spends four chapters detailing its construction and dedication,
					the Temple disappears from the narrative just as Israel’s religious
					commitment to God fades from the minds of its rulers. Its final
					destruction at the hands of the Babylonians mirrors Israel’s total
					neglect of God’s covenant.

Part of the purpose of the books of Kings is to provide
					a cultural history of Israel that the Israelites can read to understand
					the history of their people. The authors and compilers of the books
					use rhetorical devices to reflect this purpose. One such device
					is the simultaneous telling of the histories of Israel and Judah.
					Accounts of Israelite kings always accompany accounts of contemporary
					kings in Judah. The narrator then describes how God views each king. This
					rhetorical device labels each king’s reign as good or evil, and provides
					a moral evaluation of Israel and Judah’s history. Judah appears
					generally more good than Israel since it has more good kings, a
					trend that reflects God’s promise to Solomon that he will bless
					Judah because it is the site of King David’s legacy in Jerusalem. On
					the whole, however, both Judah and Israel have a majority of evil
					kings. In spite of Hezekiah and Josiah’s laudable reforms in Judah,
					the attacks by Assyria and Babylon appear to be punishment for the
					religious deterioration of the Israelites.

As the books’ religious protagonists, Elijah and Elisha
					illustrate that the nature of prophets has changed throughout the
					Old Testament. Moses, Joshua, the judges, and David are all leaders
					of the Israelites, and, as the people’s representatives, they meet
					with God on mountains or in religious centers to intercede on behalf
					of the people for their wrongdoing. Elijah and Elisha, however,
					are located on the outskirts of communities, and they utter mystical
					warnings or oracles to Israel that are fatalistic at best. Rather
					than leading the people to greatness, Elijah’s contest with the
					priests of Baal is merely an attempt to diminish the people’s ongoing
					evil, and Elisha’s healing of the peasant boy only helps to ease
					pain. The narrator mentions Elisha’s death only in passing, and
					Elijah is not actually buried in Israel. He is, instead, taken straight
					into heaven by supernatural means, an event that suggests that the
					land is too evil for God’s prophets. Whereas God formerly presents
					himself to Moses using thunder and lightning, God’s small, gentle
					whisper to Elijah shows that the people’s worship of other deities
					has effectively quelled God’s voice in Israel.

