The protagonist and narrator of the novel, who suffers from amnesia and migraines from an unspecified accident she spends the novel trying to remember. She is Penny’s only child and the oldest grandchild. One of the Liars, Cadence is devastated by her father’s leaving the family but does her best to hold it together, as her mother demands. She finds refuge in Beechwood Island and the older cousins there, Mirren and Johnny, as well as Gat, a friend of the family. She enjoys playing with words by twisting their meanings and alternates between despondency and self-righteousness.

Harris’s youngest child and the first to give him a grandchild. Penny, aka Penelope, lives at Windemere on Beechwood Island and in Burlington, Vermont. Left by her husband, Penny fights bitterly with her sisters over the estate, drinks too much wine, and watches nervously over her daughter Cadence. Penny continues her mother’s legacy by breeding golden retrievers, but the business is not profitable, and she is in danger of running out of money from her trust fund.

Ed’s nephew, Cadence’s love interest, and one of the Liars. Gat is unrelated to the Sinclairs. He joins the Liars on the Island when they are all eight, after his father’s recent death, courtesy of his uncle Ed, who is dating Johnny’s mother Carrie. Gat and his uncle are dark-skinned, with Asian Indian roots, in stark contrast to the fair, blond, blue-eyed Sinclairs. Like Johnny, Gat lives in New York City. While he loves Cadence, he has a girlfriend back in New York. 

Harvard graduate, wealthy business person, and patriarch of the Sinclair family, also known as Granddad. We view him kaleidoscopic style, through the lens of many characters and situations. He has been a formidable businessperson and an intelligent, well-read, world traveler. However, since the death of his wife, he has begun to suffer memory lapses. He has always been irritable, especially about real or imagined slights to his family and their genetic gifts. And he takes a sadistic pleasure in using his wealth to get others, including his daughters and grandchildren, to behave the way he wants.

Bess’s oldest daughter and one of the Liars. She is lively, kind, and optimistic, although she doesn’t hesitate to scold the other Liars if she perceives they are being unkind to one another. She can also be a bit reticent and isn’t sure she has it in her to enjoy life to the fullest.

Carrie’s oldest son, the oldest grandson, and one the Liars. Young and athletic, Johnny refuses to take anything seriously. He enjoys teasing Mirren and Cadence and can be cruel but because of thoughtlessness, not viciousness. Johnny is prone to impulsive actions and dislikes deep, insightful conversations. 

Harris’s pampered wife, also known as Granny. Granny collected beautiful objects, including the flowers she grew, the sewing projects she created, the golden retrievers she raised, and the art she and her husband collected from around the world. Her death hastens Harris’ decline and to some extent the deteriorating relationship between him and his three daughters.

Harris’s oldest child and one of the aunts. Like Penny, Carrie was left by her husband William, after which she started a jewelry boutique, which has since failed. She is in a long-term relationship with Ed but refuses to marry him out of fear of losing her inheritance. On island, Carrie stays at Red Gate, and other times, she lives in New York City. 

Harris’s middle child and one of the aunts. Her island residence is Cuddledown, but she lives near Harris in Cambridge. Bess cares for her four children and helps Harris after Granny’s death with the bills and the house in Boston. She complains frequently about her excessive responsibilities, although the other sisters downplay her sacrifices. Her only work experience was as an assistant in a magazine office, which she left when she began having children. She obsessively washes her hands and cleans her home.

A South Asian art dealer with whom Carrie has been in a long-term relationship.

Carrie’s younger son. Will has nightmares, but his mother seems not to notice.

One of Bess’ twins. Liberty is mostly concerned with clothes, music, and makeup. Like Mirren, she is quick to keep the younger cousins from talking to Cadence about anything deemed inappropriate.

The other of Bess’s twins. Bonnie has recently developed an obsession with ghosts, vampires, and anything to do with the dead. She and her sister have begun pilfering small items from others.

Bess’s youngest son. He fears Cadence is a drug addict and thinks the houses on Beechwood Island are haunted.

