So—people a thousand years from now.
						. . . This is the way we were: in our growing up and in our marrying and
						in our living and in our dying.

After shooing Mrs. Webb and Mrs. Gibbs offstage, the Stage
					Manager announces that “we’re going to skip a few hours,” but first introduces
					an expert on Grover’s Corners to give a “scientific account” of
					the town. Professor Willard, an academic from the State University,
					lays out a series of basic facts about Grover’s Corners—geological
					data, the ethnic makeup of the inhabitants, and population figures.
					Professor Willard mentions that the town is very homogeneous: nearly
					all the residents are white—primarily “English brachiocephalic blue-eyed
					stock”—and are overwhelmingly Republican and Protestant. The population
					is nearly constant, as the birth and death rates roughly balance
					each other. The Stage Manager thanks and dismisses Professor Willard,
					then calls on Mr. Webb, the editor of the local paper, to give a
					“political and social report.” Mrs. Webb comes onstage to announce
					that her husband has been delayed because he has just cut his hand
					while slicing an apple. Mr. Webb soon appears and gives his report,
					his finger bandaged in a handkerchief.

After Mr. Webb finishes his report, the Stage Manager
					asks if anyone in the audience has any questions for Mr. Webb. There
					are indeed several questions, shouted out by actors planted in the crowd.
					When a Woman in the Balcony asks how much drinking goes on in Grover’s
					Corners, Mr. Webb replies that only a minimal amount takes place.
					A Belligerent Man demands to know whether the inhabitants of Grover’s
					Corners are aware of “social injustice and industrial inequality”
					and whether any of them intends to do anything to solve these problems.
					Mr. Webb replies that while people in Grover’s Corners talk about
					economic disparities all the time and want all “diligent” and “sensible”
					people to live well, the only thing they can do is try to help those
					who need help and leave other people alone. When a Lady in a Box
					asks if there is any “culture or love of beauty” in the town, Mr.
					Webb answers that though the town itself has little cosmopolitan
					culture, the residents appreciate the simple pleasures in life,
					such as the observation of nature. Done taking questions, Mr. Webb
					retires to his house and begins mowing the lawn. The Stage Manager
					announces that it is now early afternoon in Grover’s Corners, but
					then notices that he has misjudged the time and that it is actually
					later in the afternoon than he thought.

	Emily Webb enters, on her way home from school. She reaches her
					yard, jokes a little with her father, and picks some flowers. George
					Gibbs walks down Main Street, also coming home from school. He stops
					to say hello to Emily and compliments her on a speech she gave in
					class that day. The two talk about mathematics and Emily promises
					to help George with his homework. George starts to discuss his plans
					to become a farmer and eventually take over his Uncle Luke’s farm,
					but he stops when Mrs. Webb comes outside. George says hello to
					Mrs. Webb, but then hastily leaves to go to the baseball field.
					Left alone with her mother, Emily asks if she is good-looking. Mrs.
					Webb scolds Emily for asking such a silly question, but assures
					her that she is pretty enough.

	The Stage Manager interrupts again, thanking Emily and
					her mother, who withdraw from the stage. The Stage Manager announces
					that he has yet to reveal everything about Grover’s Corners, and
					tells the audience about a time capsule being placed in the foundation
					of the new bank under construction in town. The prospective contents
					of the time capsule include issues of the New York Times and Mr.
					Webb’s Sentinel, as well as a Bible, a copy of the Constitution,
					and a book of plays by William Shakespeare. The Stage Manager says
					that he will have a copy of this play, Our Town, placed
					in the cornerstone so that people in the future will know some simple
					facts about everyday life at the beginning of the twentieth century.

	The lights dim as the Stage Manager speaks, and he announces that
					evening has fallen. A chorus in the orchestra pit, directed by Simon
					Stimson, begins singing the hymn “Blessed Be the Tie That Binds.”
					George and Emily reappear onstage, sitting in their respective bedrooms
					and talking to each other through their open windows. The stage
					directions indicate that the two youngsters actually sit on the
					tops of two ladders. Dr. Gibbs calls to his son, asking him to come
					downstairs for a moment. When George descends, his father asks him
					to be more responsible around the house and to help his mother with
					chores more often. Ashamed, George begins to cry, and his father
					offers him a handkerchief. Before sending George back upstairs,
					Dr. Gibbs says that he will increase George’s allowance because
					George will have more expenses as he grows older.

	Meanwhile, the ladies—Mrs. Gibbs, Mrs. Webb, and Mrs. Soames—
					return home from choir practice. A tireless gossip, Mrs. Soames
					tries to strike up a conversation about the apparent alcoholism
					of the choirmaster, Mr. Stimson. Thinking the subject is inappropriate,
					Mrs. Gibbs and Mrs. Webb halt the discussion and say good night.
					Mrs. Gibbs goes inside and talks to her husband—about Mr. Stimson,
					no less—while Rebecca joins George at his upstairs window. The two
					youngsters stare out at the moon.

Mr. Webb comes home from his office at the newspaper.
					On his way, he encounters Constable Warren and the somewhat unsteady Mr.
					Stimson. Once home, Mr. Webb says good night to Emily, who is still
					awake and at her window, while across the way Rebecca and George
					continue to chat and look at the sky. Rebecca mentions a letter
					that her friend Jane once received. Rebecca recalls that the letter was
					addressed to “Jane Crofut; The Crofut Farm; Grover’s Corners; Sutton
					County; New Hampshire; United States of America; Continent of North
					America; Western Hemisphere; the Earth; the Solar System; the Universe;
					the Mind of God.” The Stage Manager reappears and announces the
					end of Act I, telling the audience they may now have a smoke if
					they wish.

Professor Willard’s and Mr. Webb’s direct addresses to
					the audience serve several purposes. First, the fact that the two
					men appear at the request of the Stage Manager establishes the Stage
					Manager as an almost godlike authority within the text of the play.
					He appears to manage everything that happens on the stage, halting
					the action at will, pulling characters away from their daily activities
					to converse with the audience, and asking them to leave the stage
					when their presence is no longer required. Second, Professor Willard’s
					and Mr. Webb’s reports, as well as Mr. Webb’s question-and-answer
					session, strengthen the bond between the characters and the audience.
					The apparently spontaneous—though actually staged—interaction between
					the audience and Mr. Webb indicates Wilder’s desire for the audience
					to feel included in the daily life of Grover’s Corners. Third, the
					presentation of facts about the town’s past and present complements
					the Stage Manager’s own omniscient knowledge of the town’s events
					and his foresight of the characters’ deaths. Wilder implies that
					an accurate understanding of the town comes not only from meeting
					its current inhabitants but also from knowing its history. Finally,
					the two reports underscore how remarkably ordinary the town is,
					and how racially, ethnically, religiously, and politically homogenous.
					Professor Willard’s geological references imply that very little
					has changed throughout the history of Grover’s Corners, and his
					mention of the stagnant birth and death rates and lack of population
					change suggests that little change is expected in the future.

	Though the character of the town as a whole changes little
					over the years, individual lives are transient. In the first half
					of Act I, the Stage Manager reflects upon the fact that Dr. and
					Mrs. Gibbs and Joe Crowell, Jr. have already died by the time Our
						Town is performed. In the second half of Act I, time passes
					quickly and even the Stage Manager mistakes the time, believing
					it is early afternoon but then realizing it must be later, since
					he can hear the children on their way home from school. Additionally,
					the Stage Manager foreshadows the fact that the play deals with
					both marriage and death before the evening ends when he says that
					the play details the “marrying . . . living and . . . dying” of
					the inhabitants of Grover’s Corners. Moreover, Wilder foreshadows
					Emily and George’s burgeoning romance through their uneasy conversations
					and through Dr. Gibbs’s comment that George will soon need a larger
					allowance to take care of unspecified “things” associated with growing
					older. Wilder foreshadows Emily’s death by describing her as an
					exemplary scholar with great potential—just like Joe Crowell, Jr.,
					the prized student and engineer who had great potential but was
					tragically killed in World War I.

	A number of scholars and reviewers have criticized the
					homogeneity of Grover’s Corners, a largely white, Protestant town. Our Town has
					been derided as an escapist fantasy that ignores the realities of
					the racism, sexism, and economic hardship that defined American
					life during Wilder’s era and that continue, to some degree, to define
					American life today. Some of these criticisms may be somewhat merited. Our
						Town does not offer a serious critique of social injustice,
					which makes the play appear out of step with and irrelevant to its
					own time. Nor does the play highlight the growing diversity in America
					at the time. While the Stage Manager mentions the presence of some
					Polish and Canuck, or French-Canadian, families in his opening remarks
					in Act I, these families do not appear in the play, and we do not
					hear of their experiences.

	At the same time, Wilder appears to anticipate, and perhaps
					even encourage, such criticism even within the play itself. While
					the play may fail to address pressing social issues, it does not
					idealize the town and its citizens. The Belligerent Man who questions
					Mr. Webb attacks the townspeople’s apparent lack of social activism,
					in effect stealing the thunder from Wilder’s own critics. Similarly,
					Professor Willard provides a dark image of European influences upon
					Native American populations: “Yes . . . anthropological data: Early
					Amerindian stock. Cotahatchee tribes . . . no evidence before the
					tenth century of this era . . . now entirely disappeared. . . .”
					Details such as these indicate Wilder’s intent to portray a community
					complete both with virtues and flaws.

Despite the townspeople’s well-meaning nature, they have
					only a limited ability or willingness to act or confront societal
					problems. Mr. Webb and Constable Warren simply watch Mr. Stimson
					walk by in a drunken haze. Mr. Webb offers to walk with Mr. Stimson, but
					does not press the matter beyond the realm of polite interaction. Likewise,
					when Mrs. Gibbs mentions Stimson’s drinking to Dr. Gibbs, he merely
					replies that “some people ain’t made for small-town life.” Dr. Gibbs
					feels more comfortable relegating problems such as alcoholism to
					other spheres of life, like the city. There is a sense that, though
					isolated, Grover’s Corners is inextricably bound to the rest of
					the world and its accompanying problems. The residents of Our
						Town clearly have faults, but we recognize these faults as
					our own and take them to heart.

	Wilder addresses the question of Our Town’s
					cultural relevance in the Stage Manager’s discussion of the time
					capsule. In addition to the essential cultural and political artifacts
					that are deposited in the time capsule—the Bible, the works of Shakespeare,
					the Constitution—the Stage Manager wishes to include this very play.
					The purpose of a time capsule is to give people in the future an
					accurate idea of what it was like to live in a previous time. A
					grandiose drama like Hamlet may be a pinnacle of human civilization’s
					literary achievements, but it has an exceptional story, not one
					that details ordinary lives. Our Town, on the other
					hand, concerns an unexceptional group of people in an unexceptional
					town, and as such represents everyday life better than any of Shakespeare’s
					writings. However, while concerned with ordinary events, Our
						Town will serve an extraordinary purpose: when the capsule
					is opened, it will show “people a thousand years from now . . .
					the way we were: in our growing up and in our marrying and in our
					living and in our dying.” Wilder intends for his play not only to
					engage but also to inform its audiences. In depicting ordinary life
					in a small town, the play becomes relevant to the human desire to
					know the details of human history.

