This forty-year-old professor of biology who specializes in ocean life is the protagonist and narrator of the novel. Since Aronnax authored a book on sea life titled The Mysteries of the Ocean Depths, he’s invited on the Abraham Lincoln’s mission to seek and find the sea monster. Again and again, in both his conversations with Nemo and the expository writing in his manuscript, Aronnax reveals his genius for detail, classification, and understanding of all sorts of scientific principles. He is a treasure trove of information. Aronnax is also versed enough in medicine to tend to the wounded crewman in Part I, Chapter XXIII.

Aronnax changes over the course of the novel. At first, he is fascinated by his new surroundings aboard the Nautilus and awestruck by his enigmatic host, Captain Nemo. However, by the end of the novel, Aronnax resents Nemo and considers him selfish, vengeful, and out of control. Verne does not reveal much about Aronnax’s past, but his character is clear. He cares for and respects his servant, Conseil, as if he were a friend, a respect that is reciprocated. Aronnax also respects Ned Land enough to trust him with an escape plan and to honor Land’s wants and needs. Aronnax tries to respect Nemo and often gives the captain the benefit of the doubt, trusting him to make the right decisions. However, Aronnax has a weak point. He is so driven by scholarly curiosity and pursuits that he is willing to give up his liberty. He is so blinded by Nemo’s “land of marvels” that he loses, briefly, his sense of justice and integrity.

Aronnax also changes in terms of his connection to Conseil and Land. What begins as respect turns into a deep and lasting friendship, mostly because of their mutual support. Conseil and Land trust Aronnax to protect them from Nemo, and mostly, he does. They trust Aronnax to communicate with Nemo and appease his moods and whims. In return, Conseil and Land offer devotion, even risking their own lives to save Aronnax’s. When the threesome end with hands joined, Verne suggests that they are friends for life. The experiences they have shared will bind them forever. Aronnax emerges as a stronger, more knowledgeable, and more connected character than he is when the novel begins.

