On December 15, 1971, Tiger Niazi, the Pakistani army
					officer in charge of the war against Bangladesh, surrenders to his
					Indian counterpart and old friend, Sam Manekshaw. Saleem says that
					he, in turn, surrendered to an old friend, a girl with saucer eyes.

As Saleem and Shaheed return to Dacca, they once again
					witness the Pakistani army’s atrocities. Saleem enters a deserted
					house that once belonged to a notary, while Shaheed stands outside
					watching the soldiers. Shaheed looks up just in time to see a grenade
					heading toward him. It explodes at his midsection, splitting him
					in half. Shaheed points to a nearby mosque and asks Saleem to bring
					him to the top of it. Once there, a trail of ants follows Shaheed’s
					blood and begins to devour him. The mosque’s loudspeaker picks up
					his screams, echoing them throughout the city. 

As the Indian army advances into the defeated city, a
					troop of magicians precedes them. A snake charmer by the name of
					Picture Singh travels with the troops, along with Parvati-the-witch,
					one of the former midnight’s children. Parvati sees Saleem and shouts
					out his name, restoring his lost identity to him and reuniting him
					with an old, lost friend. At the same time, Sam and Tiger reminisce
					about their old days in the British Army, and Tiger denies rumors
					of war crimes. Parvati offers to help Saleem escape from Pakistan
					by magically transporting him in her basket. Saleem disappears into
					the basket, and while inside he discovers a rage within him, an
					anger at all he has seen and had done to him, everything that he
					has “blindly accepted.” 

Saleem says that the Widow has now drained the anger out
					of him, but at that time, his anger was responsible for restoring
					his ability to feel.

Twenty-six pickle-jars sit on a shelf, corresponding to
					the twenty-six chapters of the novel thus far. Padma suggests, hopefully,
					taking a Kashmiri vacation with Saleem.

By the time Saleem arrives in India and stumbles out of
					the basket, Indira Gandhi’s New Congress Party holds a two-thirds
					majority in the National Assembly. Saleem becomes determined to
					save the country. At the magician’s ghetto, which lies in the shadow
					of a mosque, an old woman named Resham Bibi tells Saleem to leave before
					he destroys everything. However, Picture Singh, as the head of the
					magician’s ghetto, declares Saleem his personal guest. 

Saleem decides to leave soon after, though, because he
					remains convinced that he will play a crucial role in India’s salvation
					and feels that his destiny will be impossible to fulfill while living
					in the ghetto with Parvati and Picture. He decides to go to his
					uncle, Mustapha Aziz, a senior Civil Servant, for assistance. Saleem
					admits that he also had a personal, less noble reason for leaving.
					In Dacca, Parvati had seen Shiva, driving through the streets in
					a tank and decorated as a military hero. Parvati asked Shiva for
					a lock of his hair, and Shiva obliged. Parvati felt hopeful that
					the meeting was a good sign, and that the three of them would someday
					be reunited. Saleem admits that a fear of seeing Shiva again also
					prompted him to leave.

When Saleem arrives at his uncle’s house, his uncle’s
					wife greets him harshly. Saleem learns that all of his relatives
					have died and enters a 400-day mourning period for them. He also
					learns that once his sister discovered that he had disappeared during
					the war, she turned against the government and began to criticize
					it openly. Jamila is never seen or heard from again. Saleem, however,
					has a dream in which Jamila returns to the secret monastery where
					he used to get her leavened bread. On the 418th day of his stay,
					a man whom Saleem believes might be Indira Gandhi’s son comes over
					to dinner. Saleem sees a black leather folder in his uncle’s study,
					labeled Top Secret and titled “Project M.C.C.” Saleem says he doesn’t
					condemn his uncle, and notes that he, too, has been a traitor before.
					Saleem says that, although he didn’t know this at the time, the
					Gandhi family has acquired the ability to replicate themselves,
					and that is why they wanted to impose birth control on everyone
					else.

Parvati-the-witch visits Saleem the next day. That evening,
					Saleem’s aunt finds him in bed with Parvati and throws them out
					of the house. Back in the ghetto, Picture Singh and Saleem discuss
					the rampant corruption in the government and in the country. Parvati-the-witch
					shows Saleem the full extent of her fantastic magical powers, casting
					spells to grow his hair back, erase the birthmarks on his face, and
					straighten his bandy legs. However, she remains restless, because
					she wants more than friendship from Saleem. Yet every time Saleem
					tries to sleep with Parvati, he sees her face transform into a grotesque
					version of his sister’s. After repeated efforts, Parvati gives up,
					developing a permanent pout on her lips. When Picture Singh suggests
					that Saleem marry her, Saleem lies and says that he’s impotent,
					thereby wishing upon himself the curse that once afflicted Nadir
					Khan and, briefly, his father. 

Shaheed’s cry of agony, broadcast over the mosque loudspeaker, comprises
					one of the novel’s most chilling and brutal moments. Shaheed’s scream
					expresses the narrative outrage at the senseless deaths of thousands
					of young men during the Indo-Pakistan war. Shaheed’s name means
					martyr, and in the end he does die like a martyr, the shining pomegranate
					of his dream transforming into a live grenade and destroying the
					lower half of his body. However, Shaheed is unlike a martyr in that
					his death proves incidental and capricious, and thus martyrdom itself,
					at least in this conflict, is revealed to be an empty notion. His
					death serves no purpose and makes no statement—it is merely gruesome,
					painful, and tragic. Searching for some dignity and meaning, and
					seeking to fulfill the weighty prophecy of his given name, Shaheed
					asks Saleem to bring him to the top of the mosque. However, instead
					of finding God there, Shaheed finds himself being consumed by greedy
					ants. Shaheed’s death gains no nobility in the mosque, and his split
					corpse proves no more sacred than the dead cockroach the ants had
					previously been feasting on. The mechanized call to prayer—a recorded
					voice, which always skips in the same place—reinforces this feeling
					of hollowness. Shaheed’s scream, however, is real.
					Though he cannot articulate words, the Shaheed’s voice cries out
					not only for his own death, but also for the thousands of other
					atrocities being committed throughout the country.

After Parvati transports Saleem to the magician’s ghetto,
					he ends up living in the shadow of yet another mosque, an echo of
					the mosque that loomed over his aunt Alia’s house in Karachi, the
					site of his family’s extermination. The combination of this ominous
					setting and Resham Bibi’s warnings seems to suggest doom for Saleem. After
					leaving the ghetto for his uncle’s house, Saleem makes two startling
					revelations. He learns about the death of his family members and
					discovers his uncle’s secret folder, labeled “Project M.C.C.” In
					addition, a mysterious man comes to visit his uncle—who, despite
					being a Muslim, remains a deeply devoted Indian civil servant. Saleem
					believes the man to be Sanjay Gandhi, elder son of Prime Minister
					Indira Gandhi, though he never manages to confirm his suspicions.
					Sanjay was the government official primarily responsible for the
					sterilization campaign, a central program enacted during the State
					of Emergency declared by Indira Gandhi between 1975-1977. When Saleem
					sees the man he believes to be Sanjay, he says that the prime minister’s
					family had discovered how to replicate themselves. This is a sly
					reference to the Gandhi political dynasty, which began with Indira’s
					father and India’s first prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, and continued
					through Indira and onto Indira’s son, Rajiv Gandhi. Even today,
					the Gandhi family remains hugely influential in Indian politics,
					with Rajiv’s widow, Sonia, serving as president of the Indian National
					Congress Party, and Rajiv’s children, Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka
					Vadera, politically active as well.

