If there is a signature character type that marks Tennessee Williams’s
				dramatic work, it is undeniably that of the faded Southern belle.
				Amanda is a clear representative of this type. In general, a Tennessee
				Williams faded belle is from a prominent Southern family, has received
				a traditional upbringing, and has suffered a reversal of economic
				and social fortune at some point in her life. Like Amanda, these
				women all have a hard time coming to terms with their new status
				in society—and indeed, with modern society in general, which disregards
				the social distinctions that they were taught to value. Their relationships
				with men and their families are turbulent, and they staunchly defend
				the values of their past. As with Amanda, their maintenance of genteel
				manners in very ungenteel surroundings can appear tragic, comic,
				or downright grotesque. Amanda is the play’s most extroverted and
				theatrical character, and one of modern American drama’s most coveted
				female roles (the acclaimed stage actress Laurette Taylor came out
				of semi-retirement to play the role in the original production,
				and a number of legendary actresses, including Jessica Tandy, have
				since taken on the role).

Amanda’s constant nagging of Tom and her refusal to see
				Laura for who she really is are certainly reprehensible, but Amanda
				also reveals a willingness to sacrifice for her loved ones that
				is in many ways unparalleled in the play. She subjects herself to
				the humiliating drudgery of subscription sales in order to enhance
				Laura’s marriage prospects, without ever uttering so much as a word
				of complaint. The safest conclusion to draw is that Amanda is not
				evil but is deeply flawed. In fact, her flaws are centrally responsible
				for the tragedy, comedy, and theatrical flair of her character.
				Like her children, Amanda withdraws from reality into fantasy. Unlike
				them, she is convinced that she is not doing so and, consequently,
				is constantly making efforts to engage with people and the world
				outside her family. Amanda’s monologues to her children, on the
				phone, and to Jim all reflect quite clearly her moral and psychological
				failings, but they are also some of the most colorful and unforgettable words
				in the play.

