Back at the Burrow for Christmas break, Harry tells Ron
					what he overheard. Ron reminds Harry that Snape may have only been
					pretending to help Draco so he could learn more about Voldemort’s plans.
					At dinner, Harry learns that Remus Lupin has been living underground
					with the werewolves, spying on their interactions with Voldemort.
					Lupin tells Harry about Fenir Greyback, who positions himself near
					the homes of children on the full moon. Harry discovers that Greyback
					is the werewolf who bit Lupin. Harry asks Lupin if James Potter
					ever called himself the Half-Blood Prince. Lupin tells Harry that
					James never mentioned anything about princes. Harry is crushed.
					On Christmas morning, Mrs. Weasley spots her estranged Ministry-worker
					son, Percy, walking up the path and bursts into tears. Percy approaches
					the Burrow along with Rufus Scrimgeour, the Minister of Magic. Percy
					coldly apologizes for the intrusion, and Scrimgeour asks Harry to
					give him a tour of the grounds. Outside, Harry refuses to tell Scrimgeour
					about the prophecy. Scrimgeour asks Harry to stand alongside the
					Ministry and give the Wizarding community the illusion that they’re
					working together, but Harry refuses, explaining that he disagrees
					with the Ministry’s methods. Scrimgeour accuses Harry of being Dumbledore’s
					man, and Harry readily agrees with this characterization.

After New Year’s, the students return to Hogwarts. Hermione
					is waiting with a scroll from Dumbledore arranging their next lesson. Harry
					tells Hermione what he overheard between Draco and Snape. The next
					morning, a large sign is posted in the common room, announcing Apparition
					lessons for all students seventeen years of age. That night, Harry
					reports to Dumbledore’s office as scheduled. Dumbledore asks Harry
					about his meeting with the Minister. Harry tells Dumbledore that
					Scrimgeour accused Harry of being Dumbledore’s man and that Harry
					agreed. To Harry’s embarrassment, Dumbledore’s eyes fill with tears.
					Harry tells Dumbledore about everything he overheard between Snape
					and Draco, but Dumbledore seems unconcerned. First, Dumbledore tells
					Harry about Tom Riddle’s experience at Hogwarts. He was sorted into
					Slytherin almost immediately and showed no more signs of arrogance
					or aggression. He was talented and attractive and drew attention
					and praise from the faculty.

Tom was obsessed with his parentage, and after finding
					no traces of his father having ever been at Hogwarts, he realized
					he was a half-blood and adopted the name Lord Voldemort. After researching
					his middle name, Marvolo, Tom realized that he was a direct descendent
					of Slytherin. In the summer of his sixteenth year he returned to his
					mother’s home. Dumbledore and Harry enter the Pensieve. Harry realizes
					that they are in Gaunt’s house, but it is incredibly filthy. A man
					with an overgrown beard is slumped in a chair and lunges at Tom
					when he enters the house. Speaking Parseltongue, Tom commands him
					to stop, and he does. Tom asks for Marvolo, but Morfin explains
					that he is dead. Morfin accuses Tom of looking like the Muggle his
					sister loved. Suddenly, the room goes dark, and Harry feels Dumbledore’s
					hand on his arm. Dumbledore explains that Tom stupefied Morfin,
					stole his wand, and went to the town to murder the man who left
					his mother and his grandparents, destroying the last of the Riddle
					line. When he returned to Morfin, he implanted a false memory of
					the murders into Morfin’s mind.

Later, Morfin was convicted of the murders by the Ministry,
					who traced the magic back to Morfin’s wand. Dumbledore explains
					that in the last few weeks of Morfin’s life, he was able to use
					Legilimency to coax out his real memory. Morfin died before he could
					be released from Azkaban. Dumbledore pulls out another vial of memories,
					but it is unusually cloudy. They re-enter the Pensieve, and Harry
					sees a younger Horace Slughorn sitting with half a dozen boys, including Tom
					Riddle, who is wearing Marvolo’s ring. The students start to leave,
					but Tom lags behind and asks Slughorn about Horcruxes. As Slughorn
					answers, the room becomes extremely cloudy, and Slughorn’s voice
					sounds strangely loud, telling Tom he doesn’t know anything about
					Horcruxes. They return to Dumbledore’s office, and he explains that
					the memory has been tampered with by Slughorn, who did not want
					Dumbledore to know what really happened when Tom asked about Horcruxes.
					Dumbledore asks Harry to attempt to retrieve the real memory from
					Slughorn.

Rufus Scrimgeour comes to the Burrow to test both Harry’s
					integrity and his loyalty to Dumbledore. Scrimgeour assumes that
					Harry will be eager to pretend he is working alongside the Ministry.
					Scrimgeour believes that the allusion of an alliance between the
					Ministry and Harry will give the Wizarding world peace of mind,
					since everyone believes that Harry is, in fact, the Chosen One.
					Unfortunately for the Minister, Harry does not agree, and he refuses
					to support an organization whose principles he finds questionable.
					Harry’s righteousness is impressive as he steadfastly refuses to
					agree to Scrimgeour’s sneaky suggestion, even if it might make the
					public less terrified. Scrimgeour also tries his best to get Harry
					to betray Dumbledore and reveal the secrets of the prophecy and
					of what Dumbledore does while at Hogwarts. Harry pledges his allegiance
					to the headmaster, agreeing when Scrimgeour disdainfully refers
					to him as Dumbledore’s man. Rather than taking Scrimgeour words
					as an insult, Harry treats them as a badge of honor. This scene
					displays Harry’s unfaltering loyalty to those he loves. No amount
					of coercion by Scrimgeour will make him sacrifice his trusting relationship
					with Dumbledore, nor will it make him pretend to be a part of an
					organization he has nothing to do with and doesn’t trust.

As expected, everyone Harry tells about the conversation
					he overheard between Snape and Draco seems to think that Snape was simply
					pretending to be working with Voldemort so to not raise any suspicions
					about his supposed loyalties. Nevertheless, Harry continues to believe
					that Snape is plotting something terrible. When he confronts Dumbledore
					about Snape’s behavior, Dumbledore tells Harry once again that he
					trusts Snape completely. Dumbledore seems uninterested and a little
					bit annoyed by Harry’s persistent belief that Snape is betraying
					Dumbledore and the Order. At this point, Harry has no way of taking
					action against Snape and is powerless without Dumbledore’s support.
					Even though Harry has outwardly pledged himself to be Dumbledore’s
					man, his actual faith in his headmaster is finally beginning to
					wane. Harry slowly begins to see Dumbledore’s kindness and faith
					as weaknesses rather than strengths. This perception is consistent
					with Harry’s failure to understand why Dumbledore continues to insist
					that Harry’s ability to love is his greatest strength in the fight
					against Voldemort.

When Harry and Dumbledore enter the Pensieve this week,
					they learn about Voldemort’s ability to alter the memories of his
					victims, and, consequently, to frame innocent victims for his crimes.
					Not only does Voldemort show no mercy for his victims, he also shows no
					mercy for those he sets up to take the blame for him. Dumbledore is
					quick to point out that Voldemort has killed his own father to avenge
					his abandonment of Voldemort’s pregnant mother. Voldemort does not
					stop to consider the fact that Merope had placed Tom Riddle under
					a love spell and forced him into a union he never would have considered
					otherwise. Voldemort is not satisfied with simply killing Tom Riddle,
					however. He also murders his own grandparents, who had nothing to
					do with Tom and Merope’s failed marriage. Clearly, Voldemort wants
					to destroy all traces of the Riddle line so he no longer has to
					acknowledge his Muggle half. Like Draco Malfoy and many of the Slytherins,
					Voldemort believes that Pureblood wizards are inherently superior
					to Muggle-born wizards or half-bloods. In some ways, Voldemort’s
					killing spree is motivated by self-hatred.

While Harry doesn’t initially understand the significance
					of Slughorn’s tampered memory, Dumbledore’s insistence that Harry find
					a way to retrieve it indicates its seriousness. Dumbledore has used
					Harry to get to Slughorn before. Dumbledore purposefully took Harry
					with him on his mission to recruit Slughorn to teach at Hogwarts,
					knowing that Harry’s reputation would be enough to entice Slughorn
					to return against his better judgment. Obviously, Dumbledore is
					hoping that Harry’s appeal will also be enough to persuade Slughorn
					to reveal the true memory, no matter how incriminating it might
					ultimately prove to be. Again and again, Harry’s desire to be a
					normal student causes him to underestimate the effect he has on
					other wizards, who continue to believe that he is their only hope
					of salvation from Voldemort.

